---
id: 19bc18a56564f2f7
newsletter: compact
newsletter_name: "Compact"
category: politics
subject: "The Bloody Vision of Laurent Obertone"
date: Thu, 15 Jan 2026 12:00:15 +0000
---

# The Bloody Vision of Laurent Obertone

**From:** Compact <compact@ghost.io>
**Date:** Thu, 15 Jan 2026 12:00:15 +0000

---

https://www.compactmag.com/r/a54fa89b?m=33b1996b-f427-4fb3-88a9-83a2095d7637

Compact [https://www.compactmag.com/r/271e7a44?m=33b1996b-f427-4fb3-88a9-83a2095d7637]

The Bloody Vision of Laurent Obertone [https://www.compactmag.com/r/cc7efb3d?m=33b1996b-f427-4fb3-88a9-83a2095d7637]

By Michael Behrent • 15 Jan 2026

View in browser [https://www.compactmag.com/r/e9e4751f?m=33b1996b-f427-4fb3-88a9-83a2095d7637]

View in browser [https://www.compactmag.com/r/7899a8f7?m=33b1996b-f427-4fb3-88a9-83a2095d7637]

Laurent Obertone

 

 

“A cry of unbearable disgust, a voice from the cesspool”: this was how George Orwell described Louis-Ferdinand Céline’s 1932 novel Journey to the End of Night, an odyssey through the bleak landscapes of early twentieth-century modernity: the trenches of the First World War, the brutality of colonial Africa, the anomie of New York City, the alcoholism-inducing barrenness of working-class suburbs. Céline did not, of course, confine his literary talents to describing modern life. He also used them to support fascist organizations and ideas, notably a series of pamphlets from the late 1930s whose antisemitism remains shocking to this day. 

Contemporary France has given rise to its own literature of “unbearable disgust.” Michel Houellebecq, perhaps the country’s best known living novelist, made a name for himself examining the unacknowledged humiliations of contemporary existence, particularly those experienced by men. In 2010, when he was invited to the Elysée Palace after winning a major literary prize, Houellebecq brought as a guest a young author who calls himself Laurent Obertone. Houellebecq introduced Obertone to former President Nicolas Sarkozy as the “great polemicist of tomorrow.”

Like Houellebecq and Céline, however, Obertone’s literary reputation is difficult to separate from his political positions. Houellebecq once described Islam, the faith of many French people of immigrant origin, as “the dumbest religion.” He later published a novel imagining France under the rule of a Muslim president whose title—Submission—mischievously alluded to the Arabic etymology of “Islam.” Obertone, for his part, has been highly critical of immigration’s impact on French society and has ties to “great replacement” theory. His three-volume novel, Guérilla (published between 2016 and 2022) is the story of France’s descent into civil war following an uprising of racial minorities. 

> “Obertone conjures the fear—and fantasy—of a French civil war.”

There is no denying that Houellebecq and Obertone are eager to push the buttons of conventional sensitivities relating to immigration and race. Yet it would be a mistake to see their work primarily through this lens. Their novels represent, rather, a new form of social critique. In the eighteenth century, European authors wrote novels featuring noble savages from foreign lands to critique their own society’s prejudices. In the twenty-first century, authors write books about race and immigration to highlight a range of social ills, from out-of-touch cultural and political elites to the collapse of social solidarity. These writers certainly invoke the themes of far-right political discourse and violate the norms of tolerance and inclusivity that have become pervasive in so many social institutions. But this should not prevent us from recognizing the deeper critique of contemporary society that writers like Obertone articulate. And it is particularly significant that, in making these critiques, Obertone conjures the fear—and fantasy—of a French civil war.

----------------------------------------

 

Despite his considerable success as a writer, Obertone’s background is something of a mystery. We don’t really know who he is. “Laurent Obertone” is a penname that he claims he must use to make sure no one carries out one of the many death threats he receives. But a few details can be gleaned from his writing and media appearances. He was born in 1984 to a family of farmers in the Jura mountains of eastern France. He earned an undergraduate degree in anthropology, before training as a journalist. In his twenties, he worked for a series of local newspapers, reporting on fait divers—the kind of petty crime and human-interest stories that, in the United States, are associated with local TV news stations and the phrase “if it bleeds, it leads.”

Obertone may have worked the least respected beat in journalism, but the experience proved crucial to his emerging outlook. In the early 2000s, he concluded that France was bleeding, but the news wasn’t leading. This was the theme of his first book, La France Orange mécanique (Clockwork Orange France), published in 2013. Obertone argued that France was experiencing an unprecedented wave of “ultraviolence”—comparable, as the title indicated, to the kind portrayed in Stanley Kubrick’s movie—that was contributing to the country’s ensaugagement—roughly, “barbarization.” Obertone drew on official statistics, but also on a meticulous examination of fait divers reporting in regional newspapers. He opened, for example, with a horrific account of a female student in Besançon who, returning to her car one evening, was thrown from a staircase before being raped all night and left for dead. Since “France had been France,” Obertone declared, the country has never been exposed to comparable brutality. Drawing on government reports, he asserted that each day, “13,000 thefts, 2,000 assaults, and 200 rapes” occur in France (much of this violence, he noted, is never processed through the judicial system). Yet what made the book incendiary to many—though appealing to some—was his claim that two-thirds of these crimes were committed by immigrants or French citizens of immigrant origin. Obertone, who in interviews adopts a serious, calm and level-headed tone, was quickly drawn into French culture wars. The left claimed that he was an accomplice of the far right, while Marine Le Pen, the rightwing populist, championed his work. 

> “France was bleeding, but the news wasn’t leading.”

Whatever one thinks of his political motives—some suggested that he belonged to the most reactionary elements of online culture—Obertone’s outrage at the sheer level of physical harm to which French people are exposed seems genuine. But violence is not his only concern. He also thinks that this problem is downplayed by French elites. While the judicial system finds extenuating circumstances for and attempts to rehabilitate criminals, journalists prioritize the suffering of minorities at the expense of the victims. In his next book, La France Big Brother, Obertone maintains that one of the media’s main roles is to minimize and even deny the high levels of violence that, he contends, politicians are aware of but believe that they are incapable of addressing. Obertone sees his mission as bringing to the public’s attention the degraded circumstances to which they are exposed but which rarely manifests itself in public discourse.

After a third book devoted explicitly to examining immigration’s impact (La France interdite, or “Forbidden France”), Obertone decided to try his hand at fiction. His first trilogy had examined what he saw as the gradual erosion of French society and the role of elites in expediting the process even as they denied it was occurring. But what if the cleavages he had examined came together in a single, apocalyptic outbreak that resulted in the total collapse of social order? The three volumes of his novel Guérilla explore this phantasmic possibility.

----------------------------------------

 

Anyone seeking to view Guérilla primarily through the lens of racism and xenophobia does not have to look further than the opening scene. At 5 p.m. on the “first day” (as it becomes known in the trilogy’s internal chronology), a handful of policemen walk nervously into a notorious tower block in a housing project in La Courneuve, a town located a few miles to the north of Paris. La Courneuve was developed in the 1960s to meet the demand for low-income housing. Since the 1980s, many of its residents have had immigrant origins. The police officer from whose standpoint the episode is told watches as young—and presumably non-white—men converge on his colleagues. “They were animals,” he observes, “assemblages of impulses and hatred, attack dogs who were ready to break their leashes and to rip faces apart.” He wishes that, rather than being terrified, he could feel “a tenth of their rage.” After the police—who have opted to avoid a show of force that might trigger a riot—enter a building’s stairwell, they are savagely beaten by the young residents. The narrator decides to react. He pulls out his service pistol and opens fire, killing several of the assailants. Fleeing the carnage, he reflects on the predictable catastrophe he has unleashed. Why, he wonders, did he put up with the “anxiety, the booze, the abuse, the humiliation” when he knew, “sooner or later, it would end in a moment of madness, in the shadows of a stairwell”—which would invariably be followed by the “investigations, the hierarchy, the media, the demonstrations”?

Obertone does not dwell on this racially tinged police shooting—a type of incident as familiar to the French as to Americans. Rather, he uses it as a kind of Hitchcockian MacGuffin, a device to set the narrative in motion. After the incident, a faceoff at the housing project results in a battle-like confrontation between the residents, armed with AK-47s, and the police, wielding Sig Sauer pistols and Tikka rifles (the novel continually disabuses readers of the myth that gun nerdiness is a uniquely American phenomenon). Yet what really exacerbates the crisis, in Obertone’s tale, is the French state’s desire to apologize for the violence it has exercised. The French president—a vacuous narcissist whose inner thoughts are mostly focused on his upcoming trysts—decides that the incident is a perfect PR moment, allowing him to display his commitment to diversity and inclusion. He and his staff make what they hope will be seen as a bold decision to visit the project. The residents, at first in awe, soon overpower the president’s entourage. The president escapes sodomy only because he is quickly torn to shreds. Meanwhile, a prominent leader of the Muslim community demands that the French state apologize for the police shooting in addition to handing over 10 billion euros. The media and politicians overwhelmingly favor the request. At the same time, demonstrations break out in major cities. Left-leaning professionals demand that France acknowledge its racist history and address the grievances of the immigrant community once and for all. Protestors hold signs declaring “Refugees Welcome!” and “Replace Us! Replace Us!”

For Obertone, in short, a minority population simmering with resentment against the dominant culture, shallow politicians incapable of real leadership, and liberal urbanites consumed with ideals of social justice become unwitting allies in triggering a perfect storm of societal collapse. Armed groups of Muslim minorities go on rampages throughout Paris and other large cities. A caliphate of Seine Saint-Denis (the low-income district north of Paris) is declared and gradually extends to the capital, while a sleeper cell of an Islamic State-type organization seizes control of a village in central France, burning its inhabitants to death after corralling them into the local church in a replay of the German atrocities committed at Oradour-sur-Glane in 1944. Huge fires gut Paris and its surroundings, leaving highways clogged with thousands of incinerated vehicles. The power grid fails, along with cell phone service. Most people find themselves confined to their homes or apartments, with no regular access to food or water.  Obertone presents the violence that besets post-apocalyptic France in excruciating detail. Rape, torture, child murder, and cannibalism all get their fair due. Planes fall on Paris, corpses fill the Seine, and much of the city is consumed by flames. No one bothers to ask the classic question, “Is Paris burning?”

> “The flip side of Obertone’s fantasy of a modern war of all against all is a Leviathan.”

Obertone’s Armageddon is a mixture of disasters real and imagined—the fall of France and covid, post-nuclear holocaust and environmental catastrophe. Yet what most interests him is the way contemporary society could return to a Hobbesian state of nature, in which life is nasty, brutish, and short. Indeed, Hobbes’ thinking is directly relevant to Obertone’s story (though it is never mentioned), because he also wants to show how the breakdown of social order becomes the justification of the reassertion of the state. A shadowy bureaucrat named Escard based at the military fort of Vincennes, to the east of Paris, is the last remaining vestige of sovereignty on French soil. Escard realizes that what the French crave, more than anything, is a state. What’s the point of a protest if there is no state to respond to it? He prepares for a restoration of authority (with inevitable American military support, though the Chinese also pitch in). Most importantly, Escard believes that the state must crush any instance of autonomous social organization that has emerged during the crisis. We are introduced, for instance, to a mountain community in the French Alps run on principles that would have warmed the Unabomber’s heart. Escard’s black helicopters bring an end to the experiment. The flip side of Obertone’s fantasy of a modern war of all against all is a Leviathan that brings back order while displaying totalitarian contempt for an independent civil society. 

When their phones flicker back on, the French realize the crisis is over. Like the second coming of Charles de Gaulle, Escard “liberates” France, using his forces to restore order and civilization. But like de Gaulle, he needs a myth to explain the thirty-day trauma the country has just experienced. For the former, it was the noble lie that “we had all resisted.” For Escard, it is that such a colossal breakdown can only be the work of the far right. In Guérilla’s final volume Escard tracks down a lone wolf terrorist named Vincent, who, since the first volume, has carried out a series of skillful vigilante assassinations against major cultural and political figures. Thanks to Vincent’s nihilistic ruthlessness and a patriotic rebellion in the military, Escard is killed and his government deposed. Obertone provides only the most elusive hints as to where France finds itself after this strange ordeal.

----------------------------------------

 

What haunts Obertone is less the idea of a “great replacement” or a Parisian caliphate than his conviction that such developments would be welcomed by slogan-chanting professionals. At the end of the day, his beef is less with immigration than with progressive culture. A recurring joke throughout Guérilla concerns the French word vivre-ensemble, a phrase that means “living together” and refers to the ideal of a community that transcends particular identities. In the first volume, the president travels with his Minister of Living Together. As the story unfolds, progressives make the term more and more positive—“living together very well,” “living together really very well indeed”—even as the narrative’s body count rises. Obertone presents elite culture as focused on verbiage amid social breakdown. On day four of the crisis, Obertone envisions an emergency meeting of activist groups in Paris’ well-heeled sixteenth arrondissement. As rioters from the suburbs randomly massacre residents in the streets below, feminists and trans activists debate how they should view the insurgents. The conversation quickly degenerates, with one side crying “transplaining!” as the other retorts with “imperialist!” (Obertone’s send-up shows that the jargon of wokeism is the ultimate ruse of American cultural domination; few elements of French society are as objectively under the sway of the United States’ hegemony as its progressive vanguards.) Finally, Obertone believes that progressivism creates a subservient political disposition because its aims can only be achieved by an all-powerful state. When Escard returns, he understands that progressivism must be the de facto state ideology. He abolishes the police, creates a Ministry of Reparations, and makes Libération, the fashionable Parisian daily, the state newspaper. Guérilla is less about a great replacement than virtue signaling towards Gomorrah. 

What if there was a battle for the soul of Western civilization and no one showed up? One of the most disturbing scenes he conjures up occurs at the La Courneuve housing projects, shortly after the residents have conquered the area. The new caliph has decided that while “infidel” women shall be spared (mostly so they can be forced into sexual servitude), the men should be executed. The most efficient way to do so, they decide, is simply to push them off the top floors of the tower blocks. The very emblem of this population’s exclusion from society becomes the mechanism for its revenge. In Obertone’s recounting, the men line up, all the way up the stairwell, with lemming-line complicity. “No one attempted to rebel. A little like the priority was, above all, not to offend.” Young fathers utter soothing words to their sons before leaping with them into the void. The scene captures the essence of Obertone’s vision. French society is not overthrown. It commits collective suicide. 

> “French society is not overthrown. It commits collective suicide.”

Lurking beneath its sadism, however, Obertone’s story has a kind of residual moral: Human beings ignore reality at their own risk. Guérilla is a tale of barbarism, but barbarians have often been a foil through which writers have gauged the merits of civilization. The war of all against all is also a “time of pure reality.” When a progressive psychologist expresses outrage that the anarchist community in which she has found refuge opens fire on vagrants seeking food, she is informed that “the reality principle is back.” The real, Obertone remarks at another point, is “that which exists independently” and is not a “product of thought.” The crisis Obertone imagines is a cautionary tale about what happens when civilization leaves reality behind. The sleep of reality produces monsters: these can produce abstractions (“humanity,” “living together”) and artificial constructs like the state. He never argues that some races are inferior to others. He suggests, rather, that humans are driven by tribal attitudes that can only be transcended by highly contingent means. The danger is that human thought can make us disregard these realities and believe that purely notional conceits are grounded in reality. The monarchist thinker Joseph de Maistre mocked the French revolutionary declarations that were based on appeals to the “rights of man,” asserting: “In my life I have seen Frenchmen, Italians, Russians, and so on. I even know, thanks to Montesquieu, that one can be Persian. But as for man, I declare I’ve never encountered him.” Obertone’s outlook is similar: the problem is not immigrants, but the fantasies and abstractions that prevent Western societies from making sense of their own predicament. 

Obertone warns that a society devoted to high-minded ideals risks ignoring and even rationalizing the implications of these ideals, including tolerance for high levels of violence. The only cure is an encounter with reality. Indeed, the subtitle of his first book is “no one is supposed to ignore reality.” Yet it is not clear that Obertone can conceive of reality independently of violence. Reality, for him, is the Hobbesian state of nature. The title of his trilogy refers, in fact, to the name of an ethnically mixed girl (“Guérilla”) who is separated from her family during the riots before coming under Vincent’s unlikely protection. When she wants to be told a consoling story, the only one Vincent knows is that of beast of Gévaudan, a mysterious animal that terrorized the French countryside in the eighteenth century. In the novel’s final pages, France has returned to a kind of normalcy. Guérilla, now grown up, tracks down her biological father and murders him. The message is ambiguous. Is she the inevitable product of a violent society or has she transcended the narrow limits of her society through violence? De Maistre, after all, believed that the sacred foundation of any legitimate social order was the executioner. Other than violence, it is not clear what Obertone’s teleology is, or what conception of the common good he embraces. Unless we are prepared to submit to a Leviathan (an option Obertone clearly rejects), he seems to think that to survive in the state of nature, we must rely on our own wits—and maybe a nifty handgun or two.

His bleak outlook notwithstanding, Obertone is precisely the author we need to read to understand something about contemporary society’s moral state. Progressives in particular should read him. It is easy—very easy, even—to dismiss Obertone as a racist and a proto-fascist, as many did Céline. Nietzsche spoke about the “workshops where ideals are manufactured,” which “reek with the crassest lies.” This is precisely Obertone’s beat: showing that ideals, even—and perhaps especially—when they are compelling, are never as pure and disinterested as they claim to be. Not so long ago, the “masters of suspicion” were on the left. In our day, figures like Obertone demonstrate how a form of deconstruction has become a right-wing project, mirroring the left’s evolution from skepticism to dogmatism. But just as the left used to be accused of being good at criticism but bad at proposing solutions, the same can now be said of the kind of right that Obertone represents. Is the only solution to the social breakdown he associates with immigration an every-man-for-himself anarchism? Yet whatever reservations one may have about Obertone’s somber worldview, his work has value. The “voice from the cesspool” is one that we need to hear. 

Compact © 2026 – Unsubscribe [https://www.compactmag.com/unsubscribe/?uuid=33b1996b-f427-4fb3-88a9-83a2095d7637&key=14bffe562fcd2e3d10c3e85dcd24653286e1fd78354c565aabd989f2ee25f3e5&newsletter=ee01f9ac-f61a-4896-8560-6b7057b5c2c1]

https://ghost.org/?via=pbg-newsletter&ref=compactmag.com
