---
id: 19c03db9b569c120
newsletter: rod-dreher-from-rod-dreher-s-diary
newsletter_name: "Rod Dreher from Rod Dreher's Diary"
category: philosophy
subject: "We're Losing European Nationalist Conservatives"
date: Wed, 28 Jan 2026 09:03:32 +0000
---

# We're Losing European Nationalist Conservatives

**From:** "Rod Dreher from Rod Dreher's Diary" <roddreher@substack.com>
**Date:** Wed, 28 Jan 2026 09:03:32 +0000

---

View this post on the web at https://roddreher.substack.com/p/were-losing-european-nationalist

Good morning from the train from Bratislava, the capital of Slovakia, to Budapest. Just got a message that I left my Kindle behind at the hotel. Honestly, it is impossible for me to travel without losing stuff. I hate myself for that. Anyway, I love the word “Bratislava”; it makes me think of these two delightful personalities of my youth:
I love visiting this city, first of all because of my friends here, but also because it was the place where I began researching Live Not By Lies , and learned about the underground church, Silvo Krčmery, and Fr Kolakovič. Heroes! Unsung heroes. I arrived yesterday to appear on a TV news discussion program about “the post-Davos future of Atlanticism”. I typically spend all my time here in the company of fellow conservatives, and boy oh boy, did I get an earful about Trump and Greenland.
No need to go deep into it here. Y’all have heard it from me here in recent days. Let’s just say that my people in Bratislava are shocked and angry at Trump over his behavior. Shocked, because they really supported him — and this is very unusual in Europe, you see, even in relatively conservative Slovakia. They really had high hopes that he would change things for the better, especially after JD Vance’s Munich speech, which thrilled them. 
But now they don’t know what to think. I had several different conversations about it, and the basic theme that emerged was something like this: 
Yes, Trump tells us Europeans some difficult truths, things we need to hear. But he does it so crudely and insultingly that he makes Europeans feel belittled and humiliated. Why? How does this help America, or conservatives like us, who have for a long time been fighting a lonely battle for the kind of change Trump says he wants? 
One Slovak conservative told me that Americans should not be surprised if Europeans turn toward China now. Another said to me that he had so much hope a year ago, when Trump first took office, but now is pretty discouraged. 
I gave an interview to Marker ,  a Slovak conservative magazine, about all this. I told them my view is that Trump’s strengths are impossible to separate from his serious weaknesses. For example, it took a don’t-give-a-damn, reckless character like Trump to shake up the rotten establishment system of US Republican politics, as well as a NATO alliance that was past the sell-by date. But that same quality of character causes him to go about these crusades in self-defeating ways, bullying people when persuasion would have stood a much better chance of succeeding. 
It’s as if the only people who exist in their minds are the Enemy Libs, whose tears taste oh so sweet, and Team MAGA, who deserves its performative thrills (which include making libs cry). Hey, I have a taste for lib tears too, at times, but more than anything, I want to achieve goals, not simply enjoy the misery of my enemies (and honestly, I don’t seriously savor political sadism). There’s a whole world of people out there who are unsure quite what to think, but who are persuadable — which it’s how it’s supposed to be in a democracy.
These, I think, are represented in a significant way in this new poll from the  Daily Mail ,  which is a populist newspaper:
Matt Walsh tweeted this in satirical disrespect of the whiners who complain about ICE enforcement methods:
Ross Douthat responded saying,  yeah, he’s making fun of people like me   — and then making a short case why immigration enforcement is necessary, even if often unpleasant, but the administration has been going about it in a bad way, and needs to change, if only for its own good. Douthat:
This list doesn’t even touch other strategic failures, like why the administration has chosen to privilege ICE roundups over workplace sanctions . But just these critiques suffice to amend the Walsh caricature as follows:
I want our immigration laws to be enforced, but I want the government to do it without cutting advertisements that make it look like it’s in love with its own punitive powers, without constantly dissembling and shouting about internal enemies and acting like its own errors don’t exist, and without enforcement operations creating a police-state atmosphere for a major metropolitan area that lasts for weeks.
To Walsh and other advocates of permanent confrontation, maybe even that reformulation sounds like hapless surrender. But to me, these people are constructing a dream palace where polling and mainstream opinion don’t matter at all, where just showing strength is enough to carry waverers and anxious normies with you, where a magical final victory awaits that doesn’t require compromise or coalition management.
The woke weren’t bound by polls and public opinion, comes the reply. Yes, and look what it got them: a decisive electoral defeat and a generational opportunity for conservatism, which the Trump administration has been giving away, piece by piece and controversy by controversy, since the “vibe shift” days of late 2024.
And Yet, The Dems Still Suck
The liberal NYT op-ed contributor Thomas Edsall has been looking at the numbers of Democrats, and they’re still pretty bad.  Excerpts:
But if Democrats are to succeed in excising the Trump malignancy from the body politic, their party faces a major hurdle: public distrust, if not downright animosity.
Yascha Mounk, a political scientist at Johns Hopkins, summed up the Democratic dilemma in an email responding to my queries:
Democrats would be extremely foolish to think that the temporary advantage given to them by Trump’s unpopularity amounts to a permanent fix of their deeply rooted image problem. The party’s favorability ratings remain at record lows.
And while Democrats may temporarily be de-emphasizing some of the rhetoric that made them so unpopular, most voters do not believe that they have had a real change of heart about wokeness or D.E.I. — much less that they have a coherent set of political ideas to fill the resulting vacuum.
Put another way, Democrats — and their liberal allies — must persuade voters to have faith in the legitimacy, fairness and strength of the party, its institutional supporters and its network of advocacy groups. They need to be able to restore the left’s claim to the mantle of free and fair elections, neutral administration of justice, individual rights and an end to corruption.
More:
In October, the group behind the centrist Democratic WelcomePAC issued “Deciding to Win ,” an analysis of “election results, hundreds of public polls and academic papers, dozens of case studies, and surveys of more than 500,000 voters” that found that “since 2012, highly educated staffers, donors, advocacy groups, pundits and elected officials have reshaped the Democratic Party’s agenda, decreasing our party’s focus on the economic issues that are the top concerns of the American people.”
The authors tracked key word usage in Democratic platforms from 2012 to 2024 and found the frequency of the word “hate” increasing by 1,323 percent; “white/Black/Latino/Latina” by 1,137 percent; “L.G.B.T./L.G.B.T.Q.I.+” by 1,044 percent; and “equity” by 766 percent.
Over the same period, usage of “father/fathers” fell 100 percent; “crime/criminal” by 30 percent; “responsibility” by 83 percent; “middle class” by 79 percent; and “veteran” by 31 percent.
And:
A month later, Noah Smith published on his Substack an equally biting critique of liberalism and the Democratic Party, “Where Does a Liberal Go From Here? ”
“Here I stand, in 2026, and America’s long arc of liberalism appears to have bent straight into the dirt,” Smith wrote.
Like many liberals of the old school, Smith continued,
I watched with concern as the quest to end discrimination against Black Americans evolved into a desire to institutionalize discrimination against white Americans in universities, nonprofits, government agencies and many corporations — something the liberals of the 1990s swore they would never countenance. …
I watched as the gay rights movement gave way to a trans movement that was deeply out of step with both America’s beliefs and civil rights law. …
After decades of mass incarceration, a loose alliance of progressive D.A.s, judges and anti-police protesters shifted blue cities toward far more permissive policies toward property crime, public drug markets and low-level assaults and harassment. The progressivism that emerged in the 2010s seems to view anarchy as a form of welfare, believing that the best way to help the poor and unfortunate was to allow the worst and most violent among them to terrorize the rest of them without restraint or reprisal.
The sociologist Musa al-Gharbi tells Edsall:
Democrats have little credibility because they have been supporting lots of censorship on everything from insufficiently progressive views on race and gender, to suppressing views on contentious political issues in the name of fighting “misinformation” and more.
They and their fellow travelers have spent the past decade lowering standards, defining things like standardized tests as racist (former Rep. Jamaal Bowman famously compared testing to “modern day slavery ”).
They’re still as woke as they’ve ever been. As bad as Trump has been of late, I do not regret supporting him in 2024, nor do I expect to do anything but vote for the GOP presidential candidate in 2028, because we all know well the alternative. If you’re not on X, you’ve probably been missing all the reports about woke nurses refusing to treat wounded law enforcement officers, thinking that they are ICE (and even if they were, you have a duty of care!). Some even dare to go on camera  suggesting ways that nurses could express their “resistance” by drugging and poisoning ICE and others they hate. (Happily, the psycho nurse in that clip has been fired. She should never again be allowed near a health care facility.) 
The party that represents these people, or at least will not emphatically condemn them, will never, ever have my vote. I think many of them would actually kill people like me if they could. This does not mean I have much love for the GOP. It means that if I have to choose between a party that hates people like me, and one that, for all its many flaws, does not — well, there’s not much choice, is it? 
Do better, Republicans! We cannot let these people be voted back into power. 
Today In Weimar America
Here’s some good news from Publisher’s Weekly, about new book deals:
So this is happening! Thank you, Tom and Gary. The title is suggested by the publisher. I’m keen on Warning To Weimar America, but they didn’t care for it. We’ll negotiate, but I can live with that one if it comes to it, because it’s accurate.
Once again (for new subscribers): when I compare conditions in contemporary America to 1920s Germany, I’m not claiming that America has suffered traumas like the loss of a major war that killed two million of our men, or hyperinflation that wiped out the savings of tens of millions, or the Great Depression. Nevertheless, as David Betz keeps saying about how we in the West are ripe for civil war, I’m saying that the psychosocial conditions in the US today are eerily parallel to what existed in the Weimar Republic, which led ultimately to Germany succumbing to totalitarianism. 
I wrote about this re: the Left in  Live Not By Lies .  Nothing has changed there — in fact, it’s gotten worse. The only thing that has put a (likely temporary) halt to rampaging wokeness is Trump. But now, as I’ve documented in this space, we’re dealing with the emergence of radicalism on the Right. The  Times  has a new piece about how some within the administration are messaging using fascist memes.  This is awful, but it’s really happening. The Trump administration has chosen an ICE media strategy that undeniably play into the aesthetics and sentiments of fascism  (which is to say, treating the use of government force as entertainment, not as an unfortunate necessity, but as something to be enjoyed). And, I think, a lot of it is happening because older conservatives are clueless about the intense radicalization happening among politically active white Zoomer males, who were radicalized by the kind of extreme, illiberal left-wing hostility that Tom Edsall’s liberal sources identify. 
One thing I see from reading Weimar histories — and this is very clear in the excellent German noir series Babylon Berlin — is that the far left was highly active in 1920s Germany, trying to destabilize the democratic Weimar Republic. Hitlerism remained unpopular as late as 1928, when the Nazis polled a measly 2.7 percent in national elections. It took further economic catastrophe (the Depression), the paralysis of the Bundestag, and the masses becoming fed up with social disorder and cultural decadence, for Nazism to catch fire in the popular mind. 
The point is not to look at the Left and say, “Look what you made us do.” The point is to examine the conditions that made left-wing and right-wing extremism seem plausible to more and more people in a particular time and place, as the only way out. Folks, we are there in America today. We really are. 
Take a look at Daniel McCarthy’s analysis of the anti-ICE mobs as an expression of liberal fascism.  Excerpts:
The other side in the moral conflict here doesn’t have to prejudge matters of fact. The Border Patrol officer or officers who shot Pretti might have been wrong. But the presumptions of civilization are on law enforcement’s side. If there is violence between officers and someone else, officers have the superior right to use force. The attempt to negate laws through mob actions and systematic harassment campaigns – which is what the anti-ICE activists have been conducting – are wrong in themselves, whether or not the laws are entirely right. This is because, as everyone knows, America is not a totalitarian society, elections do matter and immigration enforcement is necessary for any country. It’s a basic form of the rule of law; it is not fascism.
In fact, the use of mobs to intimidate designated enemies and overawe the forces of law is historically characteristic of fascism and other revolutionary movements. The anti-ICE movement may not be fascist, but if it were really so sensitive about anything that bears the faintest similarity to fascism, it would have to renounce its present tactics. That won’t happen because while the anti-ICE activists and their allies in the media and politics do truly hate Donald Trump and anything that defends our immigration laws, they don’t actually believe that fascism has come to America. It may be Trump they hate, but it’s America they’re angry at – the left considers the country quite racist and wicked enough on its own terms, without its having to owe any debt to Mussolini, while the NeverTrumpers are cynics who are happy to ally with ideologues who aspire to revolution, as long as doing so promises to hurt the man (and the MAGA movement) they resent.
More:
What the anti-ICE coalition represents is not a throwback to the Russian Revolution  of a century ago, needless to say. But it does represent a revolutionary system. That system is one in which left-wing activists decide which laws may be enforced, using mobs and harassment networks to enforce their own decrees. The choice in Minneapolis is not between law and freedom, it’s between two different versions of power and legitimacy. The old constitutional order derived legitimacy from the people’s choices in elections, and that legitimacy both authorized police to use coercion and provided legal and political restraints upon them. The radical new order derives its legitimacy from a claim that progressive morality is a superior morality, and so progressives have the natural authority to make and enforce rules for everyone, using any means necessary. The old constitutional system separated government and civil society, giving the former coercive power but subjecting it to legal and electoral limitations, while civil society was free to ignore the Bill of Rights but had little right to use force. The new system that lies behind the anti-ICE movement unites private power and government coercion, using one when the other is not available, but employing both whenever possible.
Trump’s presence in the White House is intolerable because he doesn’t defer to progressives in using the power voters have given him. Choosing not to enforce the law is as much an assertion of power as enforcing it – it’s an assertion of the power of left-wing ideology over constitutional government, in defiance of voters’ control.
Democrats are brazenly open about their contempt for immigration laws, as seen not only in Joe Biden’s performance as president but also in their declaration of “sanctuary” cities and states, where local authorities will not cooperate in enforcing federal law. The Democrats can afford to be so bold because they have power bases outside elected office, in the courts, the media, and in the streets. The protesters are a wing – an armed wing, in the case of Pretti – of a para-government. This unconstitutional alternative government is what is laying claim to power in the Minneapolis tumult.
Are you seeing in the liberal media condemnation, or even disquiet, over the Minneapolis mobs? Of course you aren’t. Even the kinds of liberals who would not join that mob see no real problem with them. They really are saying to the Right, “Look what you made us do.” They have contempt for democracy and the rule of law when democracy and rule of law produces results they hate. I have criticized in this space the overreach of ICE, but let’s not forget that these mobs in Minneapolis are doing what they do in defense of foreigners who have broken the law. 
Once again, to my liberal readers: do you see why this kind of thing drives normal people to Trump? What are people supposed to think about mobs, backed by opposition political leaders, who engage in abusive and, well, fascist tactics (the use of force and the realistic threat of violence to intimidate political opponents)? As a Trump-supporting conservative, but not an uncritical one, I see how Trump’s overreach sours normal people on him and his party — and that’s why I want him, and his administration, to change their tactics. Not their strategic goal — deportation is just, legal, and necessary — but their tactics. Nevertheless, these Antifa operatives and their fellow travelers are utterly repugnant, and a clear and present threat to law and order, as well as to democracy. 
What I want to accomplish with this next book is to reach those Americans who are persuadable, and help them to understand that we really are approaching an emergency situation for American democracy, and that if they (we) don’t get serious about the crisis of the moment, we are going to lose our democracy, either to the far Left or the far Right. The far-right influencer Curtis Yarvin recently denounced me for my small role in unmasking a closeted white supremacist who abused his role as headmaster of my children’s Christian school to quietly radicalize white boys. I have been friendly with Yarvin at conservative events before, but if that’s the kind of thing that earns Yarvin’s contempt, then I welcome it. But Yarvin is no mere far-right crank.  
Decent people on both the Left and the Right have a responsibility to be aware of what’s happening in Weimar America, and choose to act accordingly. If you only see the problem as one of The Other Side, you are deluding yourself. In 2020, when I published Live Not By Lies — it came out during Covid and after the Summer of Floyd, the latter of which catalyzed a spasm of leftist, anti-white radicalism within captured institutions, it was definitely a problem primarily of the Left. I believe it still is mostly a problem of the Left, but by no means exclusively — and, as we are seeing now, the rise of a radicalized young vanguard among politicized right-wing elites is a real thing. 
In one of the Weimar histories I just finished, the historian said that Hitlerism had special appeal to young German men of the 1920s, because they had only known great instability from the war and its aftermath, and they were terrified about their futures. If you are a white male in your mid-twenties now, you grew up in post-9/11, woke America, and with the Internet. You are open to this stuff in ways that older people aren’t, in part because you have likely experienced first-hand how much contempt the Left in power within institutions has for you. You have no memory of the Before Times, when even the liberals were actually liberal, not illiberal leftists. And you will have seen how useless establishment Republicans, terrified of being called racist, were at protecting your interests, and defending a liberal democratic social order. 
Don’t forget what my Zoomer right-wing friend active in DC politics told me last fall when I asked him what the Groyper and Groyper-adjacents of his generation want: “The don’t want anything. They want to tear it all down.” 
What A Single Good Man Can Accomplish
Yesterday was Holocaust Remembrance Day. Many of you have seen this old clip  from British television about Sir Nicholas Winton, a Briton who saved scores of Jewish children from the Nazis. If you have, re-watch it — and if you haven’t, oh man, watch it now, and prepare for tears at the revelation of true moral heroism. It’s harder and harder to have faith in humanity; Sir Nicholas’s example is restorative, and then some!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.h6B9niAnU4exk4q0I4m0EelgeQz6LB6dRtUmFG1GBEc?
