---
id: 19dcb8124e40c273
newsletter: the-free-press
newsletter_name: "The Free Press"
week: 17
subject: "My Takeaway from the WHCD? Dudes Rock."
date: Sun, 26 Apr 2026 20:19:53 +0000
source_url: "https://substack.com/redirect/2a410af4-09af-4cb8-a50e-a7845d5e28de?j=eyJ1IjoiMWllZnkifQ.sG3OqnkHDNZpplC0eLA9u0NYhAE4J8yHwSPDyeVA8k8"
---

# My Takeaway from the WHCD? Dudes Rock.

**From:** The Free Press <bariweiss+the-big-read@substack.com>
**Date:** Sun, 26 Apr 2026 20:19:53 +0000
**Source:** [View original](https://substack.com/redirect/2a410af4-09af-4cb8-a50e-a7845d5e28de?j=eyJ1IjoiMWllZnkifQ.sG3OqnkHDNZpplC0eLA9u0NYhAE4J8yHwSPDyeVA8k8)

---

View this post on the web at https://www.thefp.com/cp/195559287

Last night a gunman targeted the White House Correspondents’ Dinner in Washington, D.C. The attempted shooting was the latest incident in an alarming spate of political violence in America. For our view on the attempted attack, and where it leaves the country, read our editorial: “The American Way Is Under Fire .” Now, we bring you Suzy Weiss’s account of the evening—and her slightly lighter takeaway from a dramatic night. —The Editors
Minutes before he was shielding me under the table at the White House Correspondents’ Dinner, Elliot Ackerman, coiffed and dressed impeccably in his velvet tuxedo jacket, was telling me about the Roman Empire.
As we listened to the United States Marine Band pluck out “Who’s Who in the Navy Blue” and then the national anthem, I told him I had never been in a room like this before. “This is so formal and grand,” I said, surveying the dais where the President and First Lady were seated, and the thousands of men and women in black tie below it. I pointed out, extremely eruditely, “It’s like, British!”
Elliot told me about how when Roman soldiers came back from battle, there would be a military parade. The war hero was ensconced in fine robes, riding in a chariot with his whole family around them, the men they’d defeated at their feet, and a slave whispering in his ear over and over, “sic transit gloria, sic transit gloria.” It means, roughly, “glory is fleeting.”
I asked him which historical era he became obsessed with after becoming a father, a trend I’ve noticed among my male friends who become dads: Roman Empire or World War II? “Both.”
Not minutes later, after loud bangs sounded right outside the doors where we were seated in the back of the room, Elliot was behind me and his wife, Lea. We were huddled under the table with other reporters at the Free Press table, clutching hands, whispering to each other. “You got Maya?” “Do you see Jillian?” while Elliot calmly and quietly narrated what was going on. “Okay, now they’re taking the administration officials out of the room. Scott Bessent is going to come right around us now,” and steadily drumming, “It’s okay. It’s okay.” Olly kept poking up to monitor the situation  before his wife, Lauren, admonished him, “Get your head down.”
When I got up soon after, I was shuffled to the front of the room to get to my sister, Bari, by a security guard who cleared a path for me through the confusion. Everyone was reeling, but the men were also another thing: They were activated. And I’m not talking here about the obvious heroes of the evening: the law enforcement professionals, and the Secret Service, one of whom was shot by the would-be assassin as he leaped toward the gunshots. Others, with guns at the ready, hustled officials out of the room. They acted nobly. But they weren’t the only ones.
The lobbyist David Urban was nearly glowing, telling us how he went to West Point, served in the 101st, and that he simply wasn’t about to let anything bad happen to us. I believed him. (And so did Bari, who was shielded by him at the front of the room like I was by Elliot in the back.)
In moments of crisis, something deep in our biology kicks in.
Aaron MacLean—who was caught on camera  during the pandemonium looking about as shaken as a person who really couldn’t decide if they wanted chicken or fish—was talking protocols, perimeters, and numbers with ease. How many seconds did it take for security to get Trump out of the building and to The Beast, the presidential limo? How many yards away was the shooter from the doors, and how long will it take to figure out what exactly happened?
Many of the men had hands on hips, surveying the room and counting tables, doors, and exits, nodding along to a distinctly male tune. Behind their eyes, you could glimpse the multiplication of tables by people per table, division by minutes, then seconds, accounting for escalator bottlenecks. MacLean was a Marine, and among many veterans in the room for whom, it seemed, a primal stopwatch had been started the second they saw, literally, that the big guns had come out. Immediately, they became situationally aware.
RFK Jr. sat upright in his chair nearly the whole time; ditto Senator John Fetterman. CBS correspondent Matt Gutman was torquing around tables, iPhone in hand, trying to capture the action as it happened. Andrew Harnik, a Getty Images photographer, didn’t bother to put down his bourbon as he snapped pictures of the scene. Dan Scavino, deputy chief of staff in the White House, was bounding over chairs in his dress shoes, then leading a chant of “USA.” Dana White, the head of the UFC, looked like he was at one of his fights, hands clasped as the men in the bulletproof vests got the administration officials to safety before locking down the room. “They were screaming ‘get down.’ I didn’t get down,” White said in a video  captured after the fact. “It was fucking awesome.” Many actual veterans, not to mention veteran journalists  who’d covered wars, sprung into action, whether pushing tushes under seats, recording what was happening, or simply creating a sense, with their mien, that things were totally under control. I lost count of the number of times I heard about “vehicles” coming and going, the security-minded man’s term of endearment for cars.
Even the salad-eating elder statesmen in the room—the CAA agent Michael Glantz, who went viral for digging into the first course  while thousands cowered, or the former Goldman chief Lloyd Blankfein, who asked Coleman Hughes “if he’s going to finish that” about a plate of spring peas and burrata—served to cut the tension. Douglas Murray, who spends a good chunk of his time in combat zones, was cracking jokes about how this night was a reporter’s dream; they got to report from the front lines while still having access to a buffet.
“Seeing Dana White just bopping around and taking the whole thing in made me feel extremely calm—as though there was nothing to worry about,” Katherine Boyle, a partner at a16z, and head of their American Dynamism fund, and with whom I walked out of the hotel, then 10 or so blocks down to the main drag where we’d find our cars (for the record, she was extremely calm too) told me. We saw many, many women in their gowns with men’s tuxedo jackets draped over their shoulders to keep them warm in the wind. She pointed out that in moments of crisis, something deep in our biology kicks in. Like me, Katherine was pushed down under her table. “Down there my tablemate and I comforted an older server who was extremely shaken. The men did their part, the women did theirs.”
It’s true, and among the moments of terror, and the bizarre, Veep-like moments that come right after—Can we at least get a doggy bag for the dessert?!—there was an assemblage of good men who embodied the best of the masculine traits: calm, humor, dependency, protection, chivalry, and knowing, offhand, an oddly specific level of detail regarding Secret Service procedures for an active shooter.
Sic transit gloria indeed. And also: Nemo vir est qui mundum non reddat meliorem.
What man is a man who does not make the world better?

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlZnAuY29tL2FjdGlvbi9kaXNhYmxlX2VtYWlsL2Rpc2FibGU_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveU5UTTRNVFF5TENKd2IzTjBYMmxrSWpveE9UVTFOVGt5T0Rjc0luTmxZM1JwYjI1ZmFXUWlPakUyTnpJM09Dd2lhV0YwSWpveE56YzNNak0xTnpNeExDSmxlSEFpT2pFNE1EZzNOekUzTXpFc0ltbHpjeUk2SW5CMVlpMHlOakF6TkRjaUxDSnpkV0lpT2lKa2FYTmhZbXhsWDJWdFlXbHNJbjAubmI4NzdPOGZtdUUza2dlNi1KUm5BaWdfVy0yT1pvemphNEF6X3hiTEkxMCZzZWN0aW9uX2lkPTE2NzI3OCIsInAiOjE5NTU1OTI4NywicyI6MjYwMzQ3LCJmIjpmYWxzZSwidSI6MjUzODE0MiwiaWF0IjoxNzc3MjM1NzMxLCJleHAiOjIwOTI4MTE3MzEsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.IEpvEpuNrM21HceNCGMyUrRHjxsLztPnEDLzJGEnEfE?
