---
id: 19be7193266c19f9
newsletter: jeremy-d-johnson-from-mutations
newsletter_name: "Jeremy D Johnson from Mutations"
category: misc
subject: "Reclaiming Time for Deep Reading"
date: Thu, 22 Jan 2026 19:05:38 +0000
---

# Reclaiming Time for Deep Reading

**From:** Jeremy D Johnson from Mutations <jeremydjohnson@substack.com>
**Date:** Thu, 22 Jan 2026 19:05:38 +0000

---

View this post on the web at https://jeremydjohnson.substack.com/p/reclaiming-time-for-deep-reading

(Quick note: I am pleased to announce that author and spiritual teacher Cynthia Bourgeault  will be joining us for a session of the upcoming Gebser class. Read here  for more details). 
On Wednesday, January 28 in the early evening, my students and I embark on a deep reading of Jean Gebser’s philosophical and spiritual magnum opus , The Ever-Present Origin / Ursprung und Gegenwart (1949). 
It is a dense tome of a book. 
And yet, I have many students who return for this class, year after year. They come from all walks of life. Artists and writers, filmmakers and musicians, philosophy students, astrologers and meditators. It is the kind of book that seems to speak across genres and disciplines. One might overlook it on the shelf: plain white, with an unassuming cover and small paragraph font spanning hundreds of pages. It is nevertheless the kind of text that finds its readers at the right time in their lives, and speaks to something in the depths. Speaks to soul.
Why should anyone take up the task of reading a massive book like Ever-Present Origin? Especially in 2026, when there is just so much happening out there in the world?
Every day our news feeds seem to announce some shocking and unprecedented development (from the ecological crisis to the upturning of geopolitical world order). In this context, it might sound counterintuitive to ask anyone to set aside a significant amount of time for deep, philosophical reading in community. 
But as many folks seem to be catching onto, this is precisely the kind of thing we ought to be doing right now. 
These times call for us to turn towards meaning, not mechanism. We need to make the choice to reclaim time from relentless algorithmic capture. We can walk away (at least for a while), and move towards alternative, and intentional community spaces that value close reading and shared reflection.
We hear a lot about sensemaking nowadays, but it is meaning making that we are in need of most of all. Meaning making requires a special, paradoxical kind of time—at once deliberate and unintentional. This special time allows for the possibility for meaning to arise in the middle of things: between the lines of the text and the mind of the reader, between the different voices sharing conversation. Making meaning is a temporal art, and a culture that admits to having no time admits to having no meaning. No soul. 
This sort of time must be found, not forced. It is something we cannot make happen, but only encourage: like growing things in the garden. 
So why come together in 2026 and read difficult works of literature, philosophy? Because doing so means that we are reclaiming a meaningful time that helps us refashion ourselves when the world outside is unraveling. When our old identity is in question.
Because this is how we engage our impossible present: from a place of depth.
I think we are beginning to see some glimmers of hope in this cultural trend, a “quiet renaissance” coalescing through alternative learning spaces and para-academic communities (see my note about it here [ https://substack.com/@jeremydjohnson/note/c-191901682?r=3zl3v&utm_source=notes-share-action&utm_medium=web ]). Maninder Järleberg, PhD  writes about in in this excellent piece, “Why University Students Can’t Read Anymore .”
Yet it would be a mistake to conclude that literary seriousness itself is finished. Outside the academy, one can discern the outlines of a quiet renaissance: a return to long-form thinking, close reading, and humanistic conversation taking place in independent spaces—online forums, reading groups, newsletters, and especially here on Substack. What is emerging is not a professionalized discipline but something older and more durable: literature as a way of forming the self.
This new culture is marked by a quality universities have largely forgotten: voluntary seriousness. Readers come not because a syllabus compels them, but because they sense that reading deepens attention, sharpens judgment, and enlarges the interior life. They come to literature not for credentials, but for orientation.
So why read Ever-Present Origin with me here, with the Mutations community, and outside of the university? 
Why read it now? 
For orientation. Because it is the kind of book that offers an ‘enlargement’ of one’s interior life, or as Rilke might say, an intensification of one’s ‘inner sky.’
I suppose I am emboldened in this letter to emphasize the ‘voluntary seriousness’ of taking up the challenge of reading someone like Gebser. The experience of discovering his work as a book that, as historian William Irwin Thompson once described, could change one’s life:
Gebser [is…] a grand European thinker with a grand vision, but one who comes upon his general insights through a loving attention for particulars: through an understanding of the role of adjectives in the poetry of Rilke, the resurgence of a prehistoric matriarchy in the surrealistic line drawings of García Lorca, the meaning of an ancient Chinese mask that has no mouth, or the social significance of the lack of perspective in the paintings of Picasso. It was a Sisyphean labor to get my San Francisco students to read Gebser, for they all preferred the undergraduate textbook generalizations of [Ken] Wilber, but characteristically the members of my New York Lindisfarne Symposium loved Gebser’s masterwork and felt that his Ever-Present Origin was the kind of book that changed one’s life. (Thompson, Coming into Being)
Our friends over at the Weirdosphere  have just launched a  Moby Dick  reading class  with JF Martel  and Erik Davis . Perhaps more than anything I was delighted to see a good number of people in attendance. Everyone gathered together, in 2026, to read Herman Melville’s nineteenth century classic.
And while it is a book about whaling, it is also more. It starts there and spirals out into mystic visions of the world both uncanny and sublime. Ishmael’s restless spirit carries the reader forward in the spirit of planetary wanderlust; the ocean becomes the site where we encounter a posthuman nature: at once more gothic, more cosmic, than what a provincial materialism allows. Like many great works, Moby Dick can be read as a kind of magic grimoire. It feels charged with import and in dialogue with the present.
I believe we can say something similar about Gebser’s Ever-Present Origin. And like Melville’s text, it is a white whale of a book. 
The reader benefits from having other tools at the ready: each chapter makes reference to dozens of classic works of art and literature that invite us into a more anchored and ‘senseful’ engagement with the text. It is this more aesthetic mode of consciousness, and poetic knowing, that Gebser writes from (he was, after all, a poet himself, and his writings elevate the kind of poetic intellect championed by the Jena Romantics). 
So yes, it is a book about the history of consciousness. But it is also more than that. Gebser was writing at a time of world war and civilizational upheaval. He had to live the kind of time his writing was attempting to engage and understand. His project needed to both acknowledge the world coming undone all around him while also affirming the presence of another truth: mutation. 
Without “pandering to optimism,” Gebser would insist that the future remained open. His work asks us to look at our present moment as Janus-faced, where breakdown and breakthrough, or Holderlin’s danger and the saving, are both true and accurate descriptions of our world.
This echoes something Rosi Braidotti says about the challenge of understanding our posthuman times . What is needed, she suggests, is a mode of knowledge that enables us to “think such dissonance” between catastrophe and metamorphosis, “such incredibly opposite events.” 
Gebser, I suggest, offers something towards this capacity to hold great paradox, and inhabit the tensions of the ecological ‘middle.’ 
Perhaps that is why many students feel that Ever-Present Origin speaks powerfully to our moment. Perhaps, in the end, it has been one moment of the greatest duration, a ‘kaironic knot’ entangling the past few centuries in an invisible, but no less real, process. Not of becoming modern, per se, but something weirder. Something planetary.
“…if we do not overcome the crisis it will overcome us; and only someone who has overcome himself is truly able to overcome.” (Jean Gebser)
It’s About Time
Since we’re talking about the transformative experience of reading, of philosophy first and foremost as books that we find and in turn find us, I thought I would conclude this essay doing the very thing I’m trying to say is important right now: sharing my experience reading Gebser for the first time.
It was roughly 18 years ago or so (as a millennial pushing 40, boy is that number is painful to write). I had a blue, hardbound copy of the Ever-Present Origin with me on the train into Manhattan, headed to one of my morning undergraduate classes. It was typical of me to skip over assigned readings and pursue whatever I found more interesting. That tended to be countercultural literature. In Catholic high school, I bucked against the religious authority of my teachers and chose to read authors like Aldous Huxley, Jiddu Krishnamurti, and Alan Watts. I was interested in eastern spirituality, not Western thought, because it seemed like eastern traditions had preserved their contemplative dimensions.
By the time I was in undergrad and attending a Jesuit university, that rebelliousness had softened a little bit (my sociology professor would introduce me to Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari). The library on campus proudly displayed the works of Pierre Teilhard de Chardin on their own bookshelf. I found myself swept up in his vision of the ‘noosphere,’ which seemed more relevant than ever in the hum of electric optimism during mid-2000s, when Web 2.0 was new and things like Twitter and “flash mobs” were being called revolutionary. This was all before the Great Recession, and so these things still felt like they were a sign of some exciting cultural shift. It didn’t hurt that counterculture writers had been writing about the leap from industrial nation-states to “planetary culture.” Ken Wilber was publishing books with complex, color-coded maps that confidently asserted we were on the verge of “worldcentric” or “integral” consciousness. It was the post 9-11 world, but it felt like revolutionary technologies could somehow aid the emergence of a more democratic and post-capitalist future. For my young and impressionable mind, it all made a kind of sense. Flash mobs and ‘network societies’ and the noosphere hummed with the current of an electric, planetary zeitgeist. I wanted to be a part of this cultural shift, and so I read Teilhard’s Phenomenon of Man. I read Sri Aurobindo’s baroque and Victorian The Life Divine, a text that describes a sweeping, evolutionary mysticism. And so then it was time to read another figure, frequently mentioned in countercultural literature alongside Teilhard or Aurobindo: Jean Gebser.
This brings me back to the train that morning, cracking open my hefty edition of Ever-Present Origin for the first time.
“Origin is ever-present.”
And what an opener. Something that became immediately apparent in that moment was that Gebser was writing from another place of knowing. It felt non-conceptual, like when one read the great mystical texts like The Cloud of Unknowing, or the Zen masters and Chan poets. It landed in that way. In retrospect, the most appropriate way of describing this first reading experience was that it felt like a kind of spiritual transmission. This is what writing from integral consciousness feels like, the book seemed to say.
The first lines continued,
Origin is ever-present. It is not a beginning, since all beginning is linked with time. And the present is not just the ‘now,’ today, the moment or a unit of time. It is ever-originating, an achievement of full integration and continuous renewal. 
More than anything else, what stood out with a striking clarity was Gebser’s ‘take’ on integral consciousness. It wasn’t something Teilhard or Aurobindo, or even Wilber seemed to be talking about. Gebser’s integral consciousness, its main quality or characteristic, involved a new and radical mode of perceiving time. 
Clock-time had organized modern civilization for the past several hundred years. Whatever else “planetary culture” meant, it meant that a new consciousness of time was coming into being. 
What happens when we center this theme when looking at the history of modernization? The meta-crisis of civilization? What does it help us see?
I read first few lines over and over again, because they challenged the New Age mold concerning the ‘power of now.’ Eckhart Tolle was immensely popular in those years, (the neoliberal capture of meditation was still biding its time). Even Wilber in his more spiritual writings tended to suggest that the spiritual ‘now’ was some kind of retreat, or respite, from the relentless flow of time. There was being, and then there was becoming. Meditation was meant to anchor us in the stillness of being. Gebser gently, but nevertheless quite definitively, upturns this subtle bifurcation of time. The present is not the mere now of neoliberal time. It is something far weirder and vaster than that. It is a kind of originary time.
The whole text, as Gebser’s biographer and archivist Rudolf Hammerli has described, seems to be condensed in these first few lines. “Origin is ever-present.” 
To reiterate: if one is to have any sense of what Gebser means by integral consciousness, one has to first understand that he is talking about time. His understanding shares some deep affinities with the philosopher Henri Bergson, and his notion of duration. Gebser agrees with Bergson’s key insight [ https://open.substack.com/pub/maninderjarleberg/p/why-university-students-cant-read?utm_campaign=post-expanded-share&utm_medium=web ]: time is not space, and that the kind of thinking that modernity has centered since the days of the Renaissance, spatial and linear thinking, has generated a whole host of problems that serve to alienate us from our world. 
We live in a “mobile reality,” Bergson says, and our way of knowing must be able to move with that moving world. Think with time. What is required, then, is a fundamental reworking of our perception of space and time.
Gebser takes up this challenge and its spiritual import in Ever-Present Origin. His own mutational thesis asserts that this ‘fundamental reworking’ is indeed happening. That there is a cultural transformation taking place, and philosophers like Bergson, artistic movements like the cubists, or revolutions in mathematics and physics were all beginning to express this ‘new attitude.’ Time could no longer be regarded as something invalid, or unreal. It was starting to break into cultural awareness in both destructive and creative ways.
In the end, it all flows from this initial perception of a weird and transparent time. Mutations are events which exceed our conscious volition. They happen to us just as much or more than we can make them happen. Like the notion of the Greek daemon, mutations seize us with a kind of creative intensity. We are possessed by the urge to bring something into being.
What is coming into being, in Gebser’s understanding? “The world without opposite,” open and in relation. Intellectual understanding is a beginning, but not sufficient. The work of the new mutation has to be lived somehow. This, incidentally, is what makes Gebser such a unique thinker amongst other scholars writing about the evolution of consciousness (even contemporary writers like Ken Wilber continue to regard earlier mythic and magic epochs as developmental ‘stages’ which ultimately must be outgrown). The past is never just past. It is alive within oneself (and so too, Gebser suggests repeatedly in enigmatic passages, is the future). The previous ‘epochs’ are not to be kept at a safe intellectual distance. They must be integrated, brought into relation with the present on their own terms. The buffered self no longer has the convenience of keeping myth and magic realities at bay. Since the past is co-valid with the present, the buffered self is charged with the task of metamorphosis. 
Suffice to say, cracking open this hefty blue tome was the beginning of a lifelong project for me. It has been a deepening into that initial poetic transmission and philosophical intuition.
Perhaps you, dear reader, are looking for just such a ‘catalytic’ moment with a text. Perhaps this book has been searching for you.
I hope to have you join us, then, for our deep-dive with Ever-Present Origin starting on January 28.
See you in class.
Mutations is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly9qZXJlbXlkam9obnNvbi5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveU5UTTRNVFF5TENKd2IzTjBYMmxrSWpveE9EUTVOelkyT1RFc0ltbGhkQ0k2TVRjMk9URXdPRGMwTlN3aVpYaHdJam94T0RBd05qUTBOelExTENKcGMzTWlPaUp3ZFdJdE5qWTVOemdpTENKemRXSWlPaUprYVhOaFlteGxYMlZ0WVdsc0luMC41ang2ZkdlNk0yVm1EZ1JVM1dvSEdDdm5VMXVhMHRWMlI3WFItcTN5MnFrIiwicCI6MTg0OTc2NjkxLCJzIjo2Njk3OCwiZiI6dHJ1ZSwidSI6MjUzODE0MiwiaWF0IjoxNzY5MTA4NzQ1LCJleHAiOjIwODQ2ODQ3NDUsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.lDagEUK-sUzJM2cXV5sgdzkoeWq35QU61zoUJntwsZA?
