---
id: 19bbe112c3c1f59b
newsletter: the-free-press
newsletter_name: "The Free Press"
category: misc
subject: "Coleman Hughes: Scott Adams Made Me a Better Thinker"
date: Wed, 14 Jan 2026 19:33:42 +0000
---

# Coleman Hughes: Scott Adams Made Me a Better Thinker

**From:** The Free Press <bariweiss+the-big-read@substack.com>
**Date:** Wed, 14 Jan 2026 19:33:42 +0000

---

View this post on the web at https://www.thefp.com/cp/184582880

I first heard of Scott Adams in July 2017, just after he’d been dubbed America’s “smartest Trump supporter.” The accolade had been bestowed upon him by the audience of author Sam Harris’s podcast, then titled Waking Up; Adams, best known as the creator of the brilliantly funny Dilbert comics, had appeared on the show  to argue that the mainstream media had been taking Donald Trump literally and as a result, misunderstanding him.
At a time when America’s elites (myself very much included) were struggling to understand Trump’s appeal, Adams strode onto the scene as a kind of “Trump whisperer.” Drawing on his longtime study of the art of persuasion, Adams took what he’d learned and applied it to Trump, arguing that statements which often looked lunatic at first glance were in fact evidence of elite persuasion skills.
I don’t think I bought Adams’s thesis at the time, but when I heard yesterday’s tragic news that Adams had died after a battle with metastatic prostate cancer, it occurred to me that whatever my disagreements with him, Scott Adams influenced the way I think—for the better.
Here’s how Adams’s thesis worked in practice: During Trump’s first presidential run, Adams considered  his promise to build a wall across the U.S.-Mexico border and make Mexico pay for it an absolute masterstroke of persuasion—precisely because it was so overly simplistic and technically inaccurate. Fact-checking outlets  destroyed Trump’s idea on the basis of all of the financial and technical details—pointing out, for instance, that a solid wall didn’t make sense for many kinds of terrain —and for legacy media, the wall became Exhibit A in proving that Trump was both a racist and a total moron. But for Adams, the avalanche of criticism Trump provoked was a feature, not a bug. Here is how Adams framed it in his 2017 book, Win Bigly :
In order to pull off this type of weapons-grade persuasion, he had to be willing to endure brutal criticism about how dumb he was to think he could secure the border with a solid wall. To make those criticisms go away, all Trump needed to do was clarify that the “wall” was actually a variety of different border solutions, depending on cost and terrain, every time he mentioned it. Easy as pie. But the Master Persuader didn’t want the critics to be silenced. He wanted them to make border control the biggest issue in the campaign just by talking nonstop about how Trump’s “wall” was impractical. As long as people were talking about the wall, Trump was the most important person in the conversation. The Master Persuader moves energy and attention to where it helps him most.
And during Trump’s first presidential campaign, he discerned that voters wanted radical change to immigration policy.
Years later, in his second presidential run, Trump used the same playbook. When, in the fall of 2024, Trump alleged  that Haitian immigrants in Ohio were eating cats and dogs, my first reaction was to condemn Trump for trafficking in unsubstantiated and racially divisive rumors. The mainstream media was in line with my condemnation, framing Trump’s comments as a gaffe  and a serious strategic error .
But I also had a voice in my head telling me that though Trump’s statement may have been a lie, it was not a gaffe. I wrote the following email to a friend at the time:
From 10,000 feet: Nativism is one of the strongest recurring forces in U.S. (and world) politics—as deep-seated in human nature as anything could be. We’re in the midst of the worst border/immigration crisis in a long time. How could the tough-on-immigration candidate not win?
From this POV, is Trump’s “cats and dogs” gaffe so stupid? What signals seriousness about the border more than saying something so embarrassingly passionate about it? Separate the truth of those particular claims from what it signals (to voters) about Trump that he made them.
In retrospect, I think this analysis turned out to be correct. An easily debunkable lie in the text (“They are eating the dogs . . .they are eating the cats”) can be an honest signal in the subtext. (“I care so much about curbing immigration that I’m willing to make a fool of myself.”) As a persuasion technique, it was not necessarily a mistake.
I can say with confidence that the voice in my head at that moment was Scott Adams.
Unsurprisingly, given that he was a political analyst who actually understood the appeal of Trump, Adams was a harsh critic of legacy media, and the feeling was mutual. His obituaries have inevitably been filled with some of his most inflammatory takes, in particular his advice that white people “get the hell away from black people .” (The New York Times, for instance, tweeted out news of his death with : “Breaking News: Scott Adams, whose comic strip Dilbert was a sensation until he made racist comments on his podcast, has died at 68.”) Out of context, it sounded quite racist. But in context, Adams was arguing that people should avoid living and working in environments where they will be prejudged as “oppressors.” As Adams clarified when I asked him about this comment in a podcast , two years ago, “it wouldn’t make sense ever, in my opinion, to discriminate against any individual for race or religion or gender or any of that.”
Scott Adams was a harsh critic of legacy media, and the feeling was mutual. 
Adams’s intentionally provocative moments are no doubt a part of his legacy. But in my view, the bigger element of his legacy does not consist of his moments of provocation, but of his invitation to become a more thoughtful consumer of news, his invitation to look with a critical eye at the culture of corporate America, and also his invitation to take the project of improving one’s life very seriously. As well as a shelf’s worth  of  Dilbert  books , Adams produced several self-help books, most recently 2023’s Reframe Your Brain: The User Interface for Happiness and Success . They’re proof that just as impressive as his skill as a cartoonist was his skill as a giver of advice.
The paradox of self-help is that most of the advice that people need to follow is obvious, and most of the surprising or interesting bits of advice turn out to be useless. Amid all the self-help slop that gets churned out of publishing houses, Adams managed to provide life advice that was genuinely interesting and useful. There are two bits of advice from Adams from his book  Reframe Your Brain  that live rent-free in my head, as the kids say. The first relates to one’s career.
I am unusual in that I had quick career success and achieved a high degree of independence by my mid-20s. Nevertheless, most of my same-age friends have jobs that boil down to doing what their boss asks them to do—even if they have to work weekends, work odd hours, or, most frustratingly, do someone else’s work. But Adams recommended a reframe : Your job is not what your boss tells you it is; your job is to get a better job. Once you stop thinking of your job as the set of things you’re supposed to do from nine to five and start thinking of it as an open-ended effort to get a better job, you can unlock a level of latent ambition that will pay dividends in the long run and help you avoid feeling stuck. As with all of Adams’s “reframes,” it doesn’t work for everyone, but it works wonders for some.
Amid all the self-help slop that gets churned out of publishing houses, Scott Adams managed to provide life advice that was genuinely interesting and useful.
The second piece of Scott Adams advice that lives rent-free in my head is this : “What if laziness is a habit of thinking about the cost of things or the effort instead of thinking about the payoff?” That may sound like a platitude. But I wonder if it does not contain a profound truth about human motivation.
When I was a beginner musician practicing for hours a day, I was not in the habit of thinking about how hard it is (and how much time it takes) to become exceptional. Instead, I just couldn’t stop thinking about how awesome it would feel to be a great musician. And I never struggled to find motivation to practice as a result. Lots of effort and thousands of hours later, I got into Juilliard.
Adams’s reframe is an invitation for you to try on a different mindset for size. Instead of thinking about the costs of achieving something, try basking in the feeling of having achieved it, and let that dopamine hit push you to work on it today. It’s a good insight, because Adams was good at understanding people.
He was a complicated person himself. I cannot say for certain that he was right about Trump or that his persuasion-based lens on American politics was the correct one. Nor am I tempted to defend everything he ever said. What I can say for certain is that, at his best, Scott Adams was a brilliant analyst and communicator. And his best aspects have influenced me for the better.
The Free Press earns a commission from any purchases made through all book links in this article.

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlZnAuY29tL2FjdGlvbi9kaXNhYmxlX2VtYWlsL2Rpc2FibGU_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveU5UTTRNVFF5TENKd2IzTjBYMmxrSWpveE9EUTFPREk0T0RBc0luTmxZM1JwYjI1ZmFXUWlPakUyTnpJM09Dd2lhV0YwSWpveE56WTROREl3TXpVMExDSmxlSEFpT2pFM09UazVOVFl6TlRRc0ltbHpjeUk2SW5CMVlpMHlOakF6TkRjaUxDSnpkV0lpT2lKa2FYTmhZbXhsWDJWdFlXbHNJbjAuNkVfWFRTZ2l6cmU0aGtmY3pDTE04Qk1vbS1RQzhqM01fNllwR1JnZlUxbyZzZWN0aW9uX2lkPTE2NzI3OCIsInAiOjE4NDU4Mjg4MCwicyI6MjYwMzQ3LCJmIjpmYWxzZSwidSI6MjUzODE0MiwiaWF0IjoxNzY4NDIwMzU0LCJleHAiOjIwODM5OTYzNTQsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.QT3TNLTeRdHweU3Wn7z-Gk-ERPHqpQQIL_ZWnqH9IH8?
