---
id: 19c0ea6c301b75ea
newsletter: the-free-press
newsletter_name: "The Free Press"
category: misc
subject: "TGIF: Wonderful, Gracious, Charming"
date: Fri, 30 Jan 2026 11:03:04 +0000
source_url: "https://substack.com/redirect/00653564-52da-4423-b2c6-5af6feff2790?j=eyJ1IjoiMWllZnkifQ.sG3OqnkHDNZpplC0eLA9u0NYhAE4J8yHwSPDyeVA8k8"
---

# TGIF: Wonderful, Gracious, Charming

**From:** The Free Press <bariweiss+tgif-a-weekly-humor-column@substack.com>
**Date:** Fri, 30 Jan 2026 11:03:04 +0000
**Source:** [View original](https://substack.com/redirect/00653564-52da-4423-b2c6-5af6feff2790?j=eyJ1IjoiMWllZnkifQ.sG3OqnkHDNZpplC0eLA9u0NYhAE4J8yHwSPDyeVA8k8)

---

View this post on the web at https://www.thefp.com/p/tgif-wonderful-gracious-charming

Hello, and welcome back! We have a few new Free Press job listings today, if you can believe it. If you want to save America while having fun, and can accept that the office is either freezing cold or extremely hot, please join us as an advertising operations lead  or event manager .
→ Border fallout: The American public is fed up with ICE chaos and cruelty in the wake of the killing of Alex Pretti—and Trump seems to know it. Greg Bovino, our tiny border patrol chief who oversaw the Minneapolis crackdown, is reportedly retiring early  (though the admin denies it), as he and several of his agents  prepared to leave the city this week. Conservative radio host Erick Erickson said  of Pretti’s death: “I went into this ready to blame Alex Pretti. After watching hours of footage from multiple angles. . . I can’t.” So they’ve lost Erick. They’ve also lost gun rights supporters: Rob Doar, senior vice president of the Minnesota Gun Owners Caucus, said that  “If Mr. Pretti was disarmed—absent any other evidence of any risk to an officer—I don’t see how deadly force would be justified.” Even the stately WSJ is calling  all y’all a bunch of liars: “Videos Contradict U.S. Account of Minneapolis Shooting by Federal Agents.” The Trump admin defense just falls flat. Kooky Kristi (Noem) came out to claim that Pretti was trying to kill people : “This looks like a situation where an individual arrived at the scene to inflict maximum damage on individuals and to kill law enforcement.” Does it? If Alex Pretti had a gun and was trying to kill law enforcement, wouldn’t he have, like, drawn that gun and shot at them? Whatever he was doing it certainly doesn’t look like someone attempting to inflict maximum damage, à la John Wick. Finally, after days of outrage, Tom Homan said ICE enforcement  in Minneapolis “can be improved” and that they’re working on a “drawdown ,” which is the closest to an apology you’ll get from a Trump appointee. 
A whopping 59 percent  of voters see ICE actions as “too aggressive.” And to top it all off, a new Cato Institute paper  out this week shows that “Overall, immigrants consumed about 24 percent less welfare and entitlement benefits than native-born Americans.” Wait a second. . . I thought all those guys standing outside Home Depot were looking for welfare checks, not jobs. I’m simply shocked by this.
Meanwhile, Trump is fundraising  off the news cycle because why the hell not:
Does it read a little flirty to anyone else?
→ Senator Ted Cruz to Supreme Court? Ted Cruz was caught on audio at donor meetings criticizing Trump (for tariffs) and J.D. Vance. “Tucker created J.D.,” Cruz says on the recordings from last year, which Axios reported this week . “J.D. is Tucker’s protégé, and they are one and the same.” One second it’s Peter Thiel who created J.D., now it’s Tucker. Can’t a vice president get to the bad ideas on his own anymore?
Now Trump is floating sending Ted  to the Supreme Court: “He’s a brilliant man. If I nominate him for the United States Supreme Court, I will get 100 percent of the vote,” Trump said. “The Democrats will vote for him because they want to get him the hell out, and the Republicans will vote for him because they want to get him the hell out, too.” I hate compliments like this, when it starts nice, and then ends with someone wanting me the hell out. It’s so fronthanded. Cruz reportedly had this to say  about Trump’s interesting idea: “No, just no. Hell no.” Three no’s means yes, Justice Cruz. Robe up!
→ Turk can’t help going after Armenians: Dr. Mehmet Oz, the son of Turkish immigrants who is now the administrator for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, has released his own viral Nick Shirley–style government fraud video . And this time it’s about the Armenians! Those sneaky Armenians are at it again, says Dr. Oz, who is a Turk, though that has nothing to do with this. The Armenians have “tricked” or paid off patients and are “scurrying away,” posting in their local “dialect.” (Maybe Turks don’t consider Armenian a language since Armenia should not be a country?) I don’t know about you, but to me it feels like this has deeper roots than cracking down on some shady LA med-spas.
In general, I appreciate all the grassroots efforts to eradicate public services fraud. I went all in on DOGE, guys. I was defending Big Balls till the shrinkage. We need a national anti-fraud movement. But now it’s become this weird game of whack-a-mole minority group finger-pointing—the Somalis! The Hasidics! The Armenians! I’m gonna make a wild bet that every minority and majority group in America is defrauding our big dumb government, since our big dumb government makes it ridiculously easy to be defrauded, and small ethnic groups are really good at coordinating with each other. But I appreciate Dr. Oz for reminding us that immigrants bring their curious ethnic battles. Strange old racisms we can barely understand, like suspicious Armenian writing. All I know about Armenians is Kim Kardashian. And frankly, that is all I need to know. As such, my default is to take their side.
→ Nicki Minaj x Trump collab: Trump and Nicki Minaj held a summit to promote the new Trump investment accounts for kids. Nicki is going to donate a few hundred thousand dollars to help her fans set up baby “Barbz” accounts (Barbz is what Nicki Minaj fans call themselves, Suzy, who is now screaming “pull up in the Sri Lanka” for some reason, tells me). Minaj told the  New York Post : “I absolutely love my Barbz. I want to see them bring healthy and successful children into the world.” I include this simply to justify leading TGIF with a truly iconic image of Nicki and Trump, which I hope someone turns into a modern Renaissance painting that will be shown in art history classes for generations to come. The nails. The bruise. “I am probably the president’s number one fan, and that’s not going to change,” Minaj said  at the summit. Nicki is finishing what Amber Rose started. She also touted her flashy new “Gold Trump card free of charge ,” which she posted on X . “Finalizing that citizenship paperwork as we speak as per MY wonderful, gracious, charming President.” Gracious? Of all the words.
→ The perfect Riyadh real estate conference: Speaking of iconic images, this is a promotion for a recent real estate conference in Riyadh . 
I don’t speak Arabic, so I can’t know for sure, but something tells me that’s Hillary Clinton, Tucker Carlson, John Kerry, Richard Branson, and Piers Morgan.
Here is a good reminder that there is no politics beyond money. There are no beliefs or priorities beyond money. And truly, there are worse organizing principles. Capitalism brings everyone together. There’s Hillary (my war queen who definitely wants to invade Iran), Tucker (that little goblin who wants Iran to have nukes), and Branson (because why not). It looks like the most terrifying music festival of all time. Or the HOA board from hell. Did John Kerry’s headshot get Photoshopped a little, or did he get work done to make him look like the robot from the 2005 movie Robots? No matter. The takeaway here is that we need to get off oil. We need to see if anyone in those oil countries can work a job job, versus what they do now, which is wander through malls collecting state subsidies, feeding their pet tigers, and making my beloved Hilary Clinton do a little jig onstage.
→ I thought we trusted the science? The New York Times has a big takedown  of researchers who got a bunch of data that The New York Times doesn’t think they should have been able to get. Basically, it’s data on brain development that the government collected. Researchers (some of whom got the numbers through deception) have used this data and other test score data to purportedly show how  it is that Asians consistently score hugely above anyone else, then white people, then black people. White supremacists like to make a big thing of all this. But that’s always funny to me because the IQ and race data doesn’t in any way show that white people are superior. But the NYT isn’t engaging in the actual data. The whole story is about how bad it is that the data is being shared at all. It must be secret forever! Forbidden knowledge! But the White House has committed  to open-sourcing all federally funded health research, so expect more illicit findings like how your Korean classmate will absolutely humiliate you on the SAT, if you didn’t already know that. We shouldn’t cordon off health data. We shouldn’t be scared. I don’t want monstrous podcasters to be the only ones talking about controversial research. I don’t feel morally lesser because I know that Asians tend to score higher than whites. It’s vaguely interesting but also boring and doesn’t change my life in any way. What does it mean? Anything? What am I making for dinner? The same chicken?
In another perfect example: The NYT has a big story  about the fallout from Jacob Savage’s viral essay “The Lost Generation ” in Compact magazine—and they managed to do the piece without naming the author of the essay, without mentioning Compact, and without providing a link. I love that level of petty. I guess it wasn’t fit to print. (Amid backlash, the NYT added it in.)
→ The left really thinks Usha is a hostage: I guess people are upset that Usha Vance is expecting a child with her husband, Vice President J.D. Vance, because this week brings us a really nutty take  from Slate, who seem appalled that Usha would have four whole kids.
But that’s all the “Poor Usha” we should be indulging in, because it’s important to remember that she is a willing participant in all of this. While it’s tempting to wonder if anyone else in her law-school class has put their career on hold to have four kids, she chose to have all those kids, and to leave her career to support her husband, and to stay with that husband, no matter how increasingly awful he seems both as a force in society and as an individual partner to her. Usha is free to slap “I Had This Before J.D. Went Crazy” stickers on her other kids. But if she could ever claim any kind of ignorance, that time is over. She has now seen exactly who her husband has become as vice president. And knowing everything she knows, she concluded that, yes, she wanted to have another one of J.D. Vance’s babies.
I love the idea that you should have children with your spouse only if you agree with their politics at the moment of conception. Brave stance. I, for one, am happy for Usha. I might not be a J.D. fan, but I like Usha and I love big families. Go for five, guys. Then a sixth as a victory lap.
→ DSA field trip to Colombia: Bill de Blasio is back to being  a legit communist advocating for leftist regimes in South America. Back to his roots as a Sandinista! He was in Colombia with Code Pink and various socialist leaders signing a statement against American involvement in South American regimes. It is funny, isn’t it. We’re supposed to classify immigrants from Venezuela as refugees who desperately need to flee their failing government—and we’re also supposed to celebrate that failing Venezuelan government and do nothing to help fix it? Me, I think Venezuelans had no choice but to flee the horrors of their state and I think we should do everything possible to help Venezuela sort itself out. As a mushy middle neolib, I think capitalism fixes everything. I’ve got one hammer (capitalism) and I’m here to find nails (South American socialist countries). Out of my way, Mr. Mayor!
→ America comfortable being colonized: Fascinating new data from the Carnegie Endowment .
I never got the call but if the Endowment is wondering: I think there would be a change in our lives if China surpassed us. Being the default currency and global superpower really makes you forget how good you have it. It’s like living in a gated community or a doorman building. Why are all these crazy people worried about crime? I never worry about crime, I say to myself as I walk past a massive guy in an old-timey hat standing sentry at the door all night, laser-focused on potential threats. Seems fine if China has more power than we do, I say, Venmoing my strong American dollar and then chatting with my non-evil AI helper.
→ Trump is actively against housing affordability: In his speech at the World Economic Forum, that gathering of villains, Trump came out quite literally against housing affordability . Here’s Trump: “Every time you make it more and more and more affordable for somebody to buy a house cheaply, you’re actually hurting the value of those houses. . . . I don’t want to do anything that’s gonna hurt the value of people that own a house. . . . If I want to really crush the housing market, I could do that so fast that people could buy houses. But you would destroy a lot of people that already have houses.” Yes, building houses will make the price of existing houses go down—or at least slow the growth. That is good! Boomers are out of control. They bought their homes for 18 peanuts and six 20-dollar bills, and now they’re worth tens of millions. Three bedrooms with asbestos should not cost what it takes to go to space.
While we’re on the subject: Trump’s tax cuts in the Big Beautiful Bill. Did you know there’s a special $6,000 tax exemption for seniors in it? There is . Young adults filing W-2s and paying 50 percent in taxes literally hold the entire world on their hunched little shoulders.
→ Government-regulated products become more expensive over time: There’s an update on one of the great charts of all time (GCOAT). I guess this is what Trump wants to do with housing stock?
→ Not the third party we hoped for: Daily Wire co-founder Jeremy Boreing had a long conversation  with the brilliant Konstantin Kisin and Francis Foster and explained a new movement that’s emerging. It’s a third party:
Tucker Carlson is part of a small cohort of people, cohort includes Marjorie Taylor Greene, cohort includes Steve Bannon, cohort includes Nick Fuentes—although I’m not saying that Nick Fuentes and Tucker Carlson believe all of the same things. But these are people engaged in an actual political project. These are people who are engaged in trying to create a new American majority, premised on left-wing economic populism and right-wing social populism. You can say what you want about that, whether it’s good or bad, you can say what you want about it, but it is a political enterprise. They believe that they can create a majority, and that that majority can rule the country, and it’s a new vision in terms of the ruling class in our country. . . . It’s never been as poised to seize actual political power as it is right now in the hands of that group of people.
Communism plus antisemitism plus no gay marriage? Disaster for me, personally. Truly, I am hardest hit. Not to make it about me, but this is the anti-Nellie coalition. See, I can exist only in gay capitalist utopias like San Francisco and like, north of San Francisco. A few blocks of Manhattan, but even that’s only going to last two more weeks given the mayoral situation. I’m like a special sea snail who can live only in one tidepool that has the PH exactly right or I immediately expire.
Some news from Afghanistan and MAHA land below, but first, a cartoon from David Mamet:
→ Slavery is back in Afghanistan: The new Taliban legal code appears to officially condone slavery , which is so weird because I have been told that slavery is something only done by white Europeans. There’s basically no coverage or outrage from the West. There’s a Senate Foreign Relations Chairman post , but the media is crickets. Slavery gets a little tweet. The Taliban has also banned  adolescent girls from school . Again, it’s all quiet on the Western front. There’s similar shrug around Iran’s death toll—thousands of protesters were gunned down by the ayatollah to maintain his grip on power. Estimates for the death toll range between 5,000  and as high as 30,000 . But it would be a bit awkward—and frankly, innappropriate—to point that out. And yet I keep waiting for everyone to get upset over these terrible human rights violations. I keep listening for the sound of chanting down the streets. Nary a peep. Did I just hear something? Nope—just my brown noise machine.
→ Israel does it all: What can’t Jews and Israelis do these days? A prominent American leftist says Israel makes the ICE software  and calls us  United States of ICE-REAL. Meanwhile, online right-wingers say Jews are behind mass migration, and one influential internet Nazi even says Jews made Alex Pretti’s gun misfire . The gun was Jewish. But on its dad’s side, so it doesn’t really count. In South America, a series of devastating summer wildfires are being blamed on. . . Israelis ? And in Spain, a bunch of trains have derailed on the nation’s overtaxed infrastructure, and who is being blamed but—say it with me now—Israelis ! Did you know that the bullets found in Iranian children during the protests were, according to the Iranian government. . . Israeli bullets . Just noticing. Israeli comedians are being asked to make public statements disavowing Israel before they can do comedy now. The Fine Arts Theatre Beverly Hills posted  (since deleted): “We gave Hochman through the event promoter the opportunity to refute the allegations and to release a press release and post on his social media that he did not support the genocide, rape, starvation, and torture of Palestinian civilians. He declined to do so. He is now banned from our facility.” Totally normal. What did he expect? To get hired to perform in a theater and not have to disavow his government and parrot blood libels against his people? Does he not know what time it is? 
→ Matt Gaetz did the bad things: In a 2024 report  by the House Committee on Ethics “in the matter of allegations relating to Representative Matt Gaetz,” they found “substantial evidence” of grand scumbaggery, including but not limited to sex with minors and prostitutes, drugs, and obstruction. Which isn’t the best look for a congressman, I’ll admit. The career pivot for degenerates is conspiracies and things about Joos, and that is the path Matthew is now marching down , hoping for a ratings bounce. Sad and also completely predictable. When I get caught for something, I’ll do a similar move to Matt Gaetz but for communism. My rebrand will be dirtbag leftist. I’ll livestream from a Philly DSA commune and there will be new piercings. Then and only then, you’ll know I’ve done crimes.
→ Much ado about Mahmoud: Mahmoud Khalil, Columbia ’24, will be rearrested and deported  to Algeria, Department of Homeland Security assistant secretary for public affairs Tricia McLaughlin announced Thursday. He was previously held in ICE detention for 104 days, then, as he became a celebrity, he was released. Now: “It looks like he’ll go to Algeria,” Tricia said in a NewsNation interview last week. Algeria. . . isn’t that where Kim Kardashian is from? I just feel like this is a lot of drama around one guy. I really don’t care this much about Mahmoud Khalil. Season two’s rearrest plot isn’t really holding my attention. How much taxpayer money has gone into deporting and anti-deportation efforts around Mahmoud Khalil? How many press releases? It’s enough already, let’s all move along.
→ Good lord, MAHA, what are you doing: Control yourselves. You maniacs. Do not let your kids get measles and if you do, definitely don’t let them near my kids (who are vaccinated to the gills and physically indestructible but still, I don’t want to have to explain the rash on your kid to mine).
Measles cases have reached a 30-year high . South Carolina had 141 new cases in one week —and now reports  a total of 789 cases in the current outbreak. MAHA-ians, you have so many good points. You win so many battles. Please don’t bring back measles.
→ Charli XCX and Melania movies both come out Friday: The Free Press has a lot of Zoomer women and Zoomer gay men on staff, and both these cohorts are very amped up about the Melania documentary and the Charli XCX “mockumentary”—I’m told XCX is an “icon” and “that girl”— coming out today. They are saying it is “their Barbenheimer” as I back out slowly from the kitchen, having retrieved my 3 p.m. Cheez-Its. One Zoomer wrote jokes for this item that I literally can’t understand, not a single word. To my young colleagues, I want to say Happy Charlie x Melania Day and, sorry, can you put your vape down for five seconds while I wish you a—did you just upload a picture of me into Claude? It’s enough already with the Zoomers. I’m with Boomer Trump and Mamdani the Millennial. Let’s tax ’em more. Why do they have all this money for movie tickets anyway? Let’s get NYC up to a 70 percent effective tax rate, baby!
→ You have to read this very alarming take: There’s a very essay  in The Nation called “Why I Didn’t Report My Rape,” by Anna Krauthamer.
The simple answer to the question of why I never reported the rape is that I believe in the abolition of police and prisons. . . . How silly and strange it would be to have a group of people incarcerated at my expense when doing so would do nothing to fix the damage they have already so thoroughly done. . . . as if arresting and incarcerating someone could change them, as if arresting and incarcerating someone could change what they did to you.
Does Anna really, really consider that someone who commits a crime without any punishment might, in fact, do it again? I’m no lawyer but I don’t think justice means that original crime gets rewound like a VHS. It’s really worth reading Anna’s article to understand this mentality and the world the movement wants to build. It’s incredible, in a way. On a similar note. . .
→ How is insanity a get-out-of-jail free card? Florida state attorney Monique Worrell defended the decision  to release repeat offender Ahmad Jihad Bojeh after he was found not guilty by reason of insanity, saying , “He couldn’t afford the treatment.” Bojeh has since been charged with killing three people. Who could ever have predicted this?
→ Washington Post in peril: In this week’s article documenting how many bites of a granola bar Bari took or how much cocaine she snorted off that stripper (barely any, everyone needs to stop making a big deal), TheWashington Post casually refers to  “the Free Press, a conservative opinion website that CBS’s parent company bought.” A conservative opinion site.
I point it out only because The Washington Post is expecting massive layoffs  in the coming weeks after their business has gone, well, tits up. What I’d like to propose is that these two things are related: The Free Press is the most right-wing publication a Washington Post reporter can conjure in their minds. The spectrum of politics for the WaPo staffer goes Bernie Sanders (left), Zohran Mamdani (center-left), AOC (center-right). And then The Free Press (conservative), since every week I endorse Gavin Newsom (right-wing). How accurately can Washington Post reporters describe news and events in America if this is the political spectrum they see? Who are they serving with this, exactly?
Instead of self-reflecting, Posties are wondering why Jeff Bezos won’t just subsidize them forever, which is clearly what they deserve since they keep democracy’s lights on. Here is former staff media reporter , Paul Farhi: “Per former colleagues at the @washgintonpost: In a Zoom meeting today, Post foreign staff was told by editors that up to *half* the Post’s newsroom will be cut imminently. . . . Sickening.” Someone responded: “Bezos could fund the Post out of his own pocket into infinity. Why won’t he?” Farhi agreed: “Great question. We’ve all asked ourselves that many times.” They don’t even desire to be a sustainable business. They find it offensive. They want infinity subsidies. Truly odd. Bless their hearts.
TGIF brought to you by Sascha Seinfeld, Suzy Weiss, Olly Wiseman, Natalie Ballard, and Ryan Chowdhury.
And where do you TG? As always, send pics to TGIF@thefp.com [ mailto:TGIF@thefp.com ].
Toni writes: Thanks, TGIF, for getting me through my colonoscopy prep!
Fred writes: While the whole country is snowstormed, we get our Nellie fix in the sunshine in Boca Raton.
Shawna writes: TGIF from Eagle, Idaho!
Aiden writes: TGIF’ing between lectures in the Zachry Engineering building at Texas A&M. Gig ’em!
Jennifer writes: Recovering from elbow surgery in sub-zero Michigan with Nellie!
Rae writes: I TWIC from Argentina!
Brad writes: Waiting to testify in the Washington State Senate. TGIF helps me keep things in perspective.
Jennifer writes: TGIF from Turtle Bay in Oahu.
Jeff writes: TGIF on an overcast morning in Tucson.
Yosi and Whitney write: TGIF with our hours-old baby Milla at the hospital.
Steve writes: Enjoying TGIF from New Zealand.
Ben writes: Working to free the galaxy with The Free Press and TGIF from Galaxy’s Edge.
David writes: Reading TGIF from Southeastern Sulawesi, Indonesia.
Christi writes: Warming up with Nellie while waiting for the ice to melt so I can get off my driveway in Austin, Texas.
Michele writes: Nellie and the gang helped keep me warm while ice fishing on Lake of the Woods.
TGIF!

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlZnAuY29tL2FjdGlvbi9kaXNhYmxlX2VtYWlsL2Rpc2FibGU_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveU5UTTRNVFF5TENKd2IzTjBYMmxrSWpveE9EWXlOVEl6TWpBc0luTmxZM1JwYjI1ZmFXUWlPakUyTnpJM09Td2lhV0YwSWpveE56WTVOemN5TXpNMUxDSmxlSEFpT2pFNE1ERXpNRGd6TXpVc0ltbHpjeUk2SW5CMVlpMHlOakF6TkRjaUxDSnpkV0lpT2lKa2FYTmhZbXhsWDJWdFlXbHNJbjAuY0lRalJ1SzR2ZF96cHpGQmJMMzc1MjQ3eFVGbG1oOXpnWUdlT1JFUDJhayZzZWN0aW9uX2lkPTE2NzI3OSIsInAiOjE4NjI1MjMyMCwicyI6MjYwMzQ3LCJmIjpmYWxzZSwidSI6MjUzODE0MiwiaWF0IjoxNzY5NzcyMzM1LCJleHAiOjIwODUzNDgzMzUsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.ca7eXfgGuxaiHjJ-iVfRT_ihJBE1AUy6hzY-ulFzTts?
