---
id: 19c0b3184cc2f91e
newsletter: the-free-press
newsletter_name: "The Free Press"
category: misc
subject: "‘Bridgerton’ Only Pretends to Be Progressive"
date: Thu, 29 Jan 2026 19:00:26 +0000
source_url: "https://substack.com/redirect/2c4c0ab0-c2ba-410a-8c03-4b82062dbced?j=eyJ1IjoiMWllZnkifQ.sG3OqnkHDNZpplC0eLA9u0NYhAE4J8yHwSPDyeVA8k8"
---

# ‘Bridgerton’ Only Pretends to Be Progressive

**From:** The Free Press <bariweiss+the-big-read@substack.com>
**Date:** Thu, 29 Jan 2026 19:00:26 +0000
**Source:** [View original](https://substack.com/redirect/2c4c0ab0-c2ba-410a-8c03-4b82062dbced?j=eyJ1IjoiMWllZnkifQ.sG3OqnkHDNZpplC0eLA9u0NYhAE4J8yHwSPDyeVA8k8)

---

View this post on the web at https://www.thefp.com/cp/186226924

Somewhere in the middle of my multiday bingewatch of Bridgerton—the sexy Netflix period drama which returns today for its fourth season—I started thinking about the Patagonian toothfish.
The Patagonian toothfish, to be clear, is not a character on this show (although the name does have a certain “Argentinian nobleman” ring to it). Instead, his filleted corpse awaits you in the seafood section of your local grocery and on the menu of upscale steakhouses. He has a mild flavor, flaky flesh, and, in fact, you’ve probably had him once or twice—albeit without knowing it. Because the Patagonian toothfish isn’t just a fish; he’s one of the greatest branding success stories out there, courtesy of a Los Angeles seafood retailer named Lee Lantz. It was 1977 when Lantz realized that a toothfish by any other name would taste as sweet, but that as names went, “Patagonian toothfish” was absolutely terrible. The fish needed a glow up—like when Facebook rebranded as Meta, or fat farms quietly transformed into wellness retreats.
And just like that, the Chilean sea bass was born.
What does this have to do with Bridgerton? Only this: that Netflix, in a genius marketing move of its own, has managed to persuade an entire generation of women that they’re consuming the Chilean sea bass of period dramas, a tale of feisty, independent women who defy sexist stereotypes and 19th-century social norms alike to have absolutely spectacular sex with their chiseled, handsome gentleman husbands. But make no mistake: While audiences might think that Bridgerton is something fresh and unprecedented, what they’re really consuming is nothing less than the exquisitely rebranded Patagonian toothfish of patriarchy.
It is astonishing, truly, that they managed to pull this off.
Bridgerton follows the romantic travails of one family as they navigate the cutthroat marriage market in Regency-era London. Its first season focused on Daphne, the eldest of the Bridgerton girls, who strikes up a strategic fake courtship with the Duke of Hastings only for the two to genuinely fall for each other; various and assorted subplots included sibling rivalries, society grudges, and a plot by the Queen of England to unmask the gossip writer, known as Lady Whistledown, who keeps the ton, i.e. town, abreast of every development in these scandalous relationships.
On its face, Bridgerton would seem like the Regency romance version of what Barbie director Greta Gerwig memorably described  as “doing the thing and subverting the thing”—telling a story with a historic setting but a distinctly modern sensibility, especially as compared with what you’d see on the BBC. Released under the banner of Shonda Rhimes’s Shondaland production studio, the show became instantly famous for its juicy sex scenes, which prioritized the female gaze and female orgasm in equal measure. Instead of music from the period, characters dance at parties to orchestral arrangements of contemporary pop songs. And thanks to race-blind casting, the 1800s London upper class of the show is as diverse as the wardrobe of a debutante who simply cannot be seen wearing the same dress twice. At the time of Bridgerton’s debut in 2020, the party line, originated by showrunner  Chris Van Dusen and dutifully parroted by critics across the board, was that this was not your grandmother’s Regency period drama.
That’s how Bridgerton made fans of the kind of enlightened, politically liberal millennial gal who wants to love Pride and Prejudice  and Downton Abbey , but bristles at the historically accurate but nonetheless très problématique depictions of privileged, beautiful white women jockeying for the affections of various even more privileged, equally white men. For them, Bridgerton’s multiracial aristocracy, Rihanna-but-make-it-Regency soundtrack, and modern attitudes toward things like working-class social mobility and same-sex attraction made it a show they could watch with neither guilt nor apology.
The surprise, to be clear, is not that Bridgerton is popular; it is great fun to watch and gorgeous to look at, in multiple senses of the word. I certainly wouldn’t kick the Duke of Hastings out of bed for eating crackers (or, uh, anything else). But the deliciously dirty secret of Bridgerton’s success? Actually, fundamentally, it is your grandmother’s period drama—just wearing politically correct underwear.
Every season contains multiple marriage plots and the usual attendant concerns: dowries, inheritances, social status, strategic alliances. There are balls and parties, and elaborate courtship rituals, and even more elaborate hats; there are scandal and disgrace. Star-crossed lovers are cruelly kept apart by class, convention, or meddling aunts, until, at last, they kiss. And then, you know, do more than kiss—after the wedding, that is. We don’t want a scandal now, do we?
Here, Bridgerton is doing something culturally significant—and as a born romantic and staunch believer in the power, beauty, and socially stabilizing influence of love and monogamous marriage, it’s something I appreciate. Because here, in 2026, is a politically palatable permission structure in which young women (that is, the ones attracted to men) can indulge their yearning for the best of both worlds. On one hand, a committed relationship bound by time-honored promises to have, hold, comfort, and keep for as long as you both shall live; on the other, a level of sexual fulfillment and variety that would blow the average Regency-era mind. Lie back and think of England? More like climb halfway up the pergola in the formal garden at Aubrey Hall and howl at the moon—am I right, ladies?
At a moment when even feminists have begun to earnestly debate  whether the sexual revolution was a mistake, Bridgerton presents a powerful fantasy: that a modern woman could find satisfaction in a return to the traditional courtship and chivalry of an earlier era, just without having to also resubscribe to that era’s less-enlightened ideas about sex, including the consensus that desiring and enjoying the physical act of love was strictly for whores.
In real life, this would probably be impossible—but Bridgerton is not a real place. Its creators can pick and choose which elements of the past to bring back, and which to temper or set aside. As such, women’s sexuality in this fictional universe lives not quite out in the open but certainly closer to the surface, in the form of anachronistically immodest clothing and sultry looks that would have been scandalous in the actual 1800s.
But this greater tolerance for sexual expression does not diminish the importance of sexual purity for women, and this is very important indeed. The birth control pill does not exist in Bridgerton; to have sex out of wedlock is to risk pregnancy, and couples are constrained from consummating their passions accordingly. And yet, far from being frustrating to watch, these high stakes and strict boundaries are what make the romance so delicious—and the men so desirable.
Bridgerton is your grandmother’s period drama—just wearing politically correct underwear.
In real life, in the 21st century, the average young man has spent two decades being taught to apologize for his sexuality, to be terrified of expressing it, to see his desires as predatory, dangerous, and shameful. But in Bridgerton? A man is not ashamed of his desire. And what he is taught is not to repress it, or apologize for it, but to control it. For all the actual sex that takes place on this show, the hottest scenes are the ones in which a man is consumed by lust yet still holding back—which only makes the object of his yearning swoon all the more, understanding how desperately he wants her.
In a world where the path of traditional seduction has been alternately derailed, re-routed, or blocked entirely by a consent-obsessed culture that imagines sex less as an act of spontaneous passion than a process akin to renting a car, most people would struggle to replicate the Bridgerton-style romance in real life. But what the popularity of the show suggests, I think, is that the traditional courtship it depicts was traditional for a reason. That whatever its flaws, it was among the most productive frameworks for men and women to come together, dance around each other, fall in love and form relationships.
And if the Regency marriage plot—your grandmother’s, or otherwise—was originally founded on a somewhat outdated notion of female sexuality, it also re-creates (if only by accident) the conditions under which women are actually most likely to find sexual fulfillment in a world where anything goes. Which makes Bridgerton one of the very few places in mainstream culture where it’s possible to acknowledge the inconvenient truth that for women, the casual sex that was sold to us as politically liberating is usually, alas, not all that satisfying, physically or emotionally. That there is something to be said for a partner with whom you share more than a mutual swipe on the apps. That actually, sexual adventures are a lot more fun if you’re having them with one person—or Patagonian toothfish, as the case may be—who loves you.
The Free Press earns a commission from any purchases made through all book links in this article.

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlZnAuY29tL2FjdGlvbi9kaXNhYmxlX2VtYWlsL2Rpc2FibGU_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveU5UTTRNVFF5TENKd2IzTjBYMmxrSWpveE9EWXlNalk1TWpRc0luTmxZM1JwYjI1ZmFXUWlPakUyTnpJM09Dd2lhV0YwSWpveE56WTVOekUwTXpFNUxDSmxlSEFpT2pFNE1ERXlOVEF6TVRrc0ltbHpjeUk2SW5CMVlpMHlOakF6TkRjaUxDSnpkV0lpT2lKa2FYTmhZbXhsWDJWdFlXbHNJbjAuS0hiZDFjUFp6OUF0SVBUYUJaUmp3UUZscFJYbW1pZWcxR01yNUhaa3JQRSZzZWN0aW9uX2lkPTE2NzI3OCIsInAiOjE4NjIyNjkyNCwicyI6MjYwMzQ3LCJmIjpmYWxzZSwidSI6MjUzODE0MiwiaWF0IjoxNzY5NzE0MzE5LCJleHAiOjIwODUyOTAzMTksImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.T1lWco6atZqadK75ZZB7f8fQO8DdZyBw5wRdgwjsEOg?
