---
id: 19bb40d629cd1489
newsletter: the-free-press
newsletter_name: "The Free Press"
category: misc
subject: "Trump’s Dangerous Attack on the Fed"
date: Mon, 12 Jan 2026 20:52:16 +0000
---

# Trump’s Dangerous Attack on the Fed

**From:** The Free Press <bariweiss+the-big-read@substack.com>
**Date:** Mon, 12 Jan 2026 20:52:16 +0000

---

View this post on the web at https://www.thefp.com/p/trumps-dangerous-attack-on-the-fed

President Donald Trump mused about his own power recently when a reporter asked him what, if anything, could restrain his actions overseas. “There is one thing,” he replied. “My own morality. My own mind. It’s the only thing that can stop me.”
Days later, the Trump administration attacked one of America’s most important and most delicate domestic institutions, making clear that the president’s limitless mindset applies equally at home. The Justice Department on Friday served the Federal Reserve with grand jury subpoenas, indicating that federal prosecutors have opened a criminal investigation of Fed chief Jerome Powell. The investigation puts Powell at the mercy of prosecutors who are accountable to Trump, and it could curb his ability to steer monetary policy independently.
The probe ostensibly investigates Powell’s statements to Congress last year about renovations of Fed buildings. Those renovations ran over budget, with the cost growing from about $1.9 billion to $2.5 billion. That kind of ballooning in construction costs is surely familiar to a real estate developer like Trump, yet Trump threatened last summer to fire Powell over the renovations, until White House advisers urged him to back down. The reemergence of the issue suggests that Trump wasn’t swayed for long, and that he had bigger reasons to target Powell than supposedly misspent construction money.
The Fed chairman said so himself in a video statement Sunday night. “The threat of criminal charges is a consequence of the Federal Reserve setting interest rates based on our best assessment of what will serve the public, rather than following the preferences of the president.” Trump has done everything in his power to threaten or cajole Powell into lowering interest rates and turbo-charging the economy, no matter the long-term consequences. Powell has spent years shrugging off those critiques, threats, and demands since the president appointed him in 2018. But a trumped-up criminal case was too much to endure silently, and his statement also signaled to investors that the threat wouldn’t shift his policies.
Trump has denied that he sought the investigation, but that stretches belief. He threatened to sue Powell for “incompetence” only last month. Trump has also denied demanding probes into his other political archenemies, such as former FBI director James Comey, New York attorney general Letitia James, and California Senator Adam Schiff. Yet his own haphazard social media post in September showed him leaning on his attorney general, Pam Bondi, to pursue these targets, and the Justice Department moved on all three within months.
Trump’s decision to weaponize the Justice Department is especially regrettable because he returned to the presidency having overcome the biggest onslaught of lawfare in American history. In addition to a yearslong investigation into his supposed collusion with Russia, which was spurred by mendacious Democratic opposition research, Trump was hit with four Democratic-led criminal indictments after he left office, none of which met the standards that prosecutors typically observe when they charge a politician. Trump showed flickers of grace in the face of this barrage, pledging not to return fire if he returned to the presidency.
Trump’s decision to weaponize the Justice Department is especially regrettable because he returned to office having overcome the biggest onslaught of lawfare in American history.
Now that he’s done so, he looks every bit as aggrieved as his Democratic tormenters. Trump’s lawfare will repel moderate voters—that small but vital share of the public who rallied to Trump in 2024, in part because they saw the unfairness of the attacks he was facing. Yet the same Americans who saw through Trump’s conviction for convoluted charges in a New York courtroom will see instantly that Trump is playing the same game with the Fed, and risking the economy to do it.
One irony of Trump’s campaign against Powell is that the lower interest rates Trump craves might end up hurting him politically. Inflation has fallen since Trump resumed office, but it is still above the Fed’s target of 2 percent annually, and most Americans believe their wages haven’t caught up to the price levels set while inflation soared under President Joe Biden. Trump wants easy money to juice corporate hiring and reduce the cost of interest on federal debt. But prices are still a bigger concern for most voters, and it’s likely that the Fed’s caution around cutting rates has helped control inflation and reduce public rage.
Powell deserves credit for standing his ground. In his statement Sunday, he went beyond denying the basis of the probe and clearly stated the real stakes of the case. The independence of a central bank has long been a hallmark of responsible government; control over the money supply is something autocrats routinely covet. A group of former Fed chairmen, Treasury secretaries, and White House economic advisers blasted the investigation  in a statement Monday, saying, “This is how monetary policy is made in emerging markets with weak institutions.”
Trump may plan to use the criminal probe as a rationale to fire Powell, who can only be removed for cause. The president used a similar maneuver in August to try to fire Fed board member Lisa Cook, demanding her removal as the Justice Department investigates her for mortgage fraud. Cook remains at the Fed as she contests the firing, and thus far no charges against her have been filed. Powell, too, is not giving way and has pledged to remain in his role until his term as chairman expires in May.
Government can only work if public officials defend themselves in this way, including against pressure from within their own party. It also helps when those who disagree with the Trump administration’s actions are able to speak freely, without fear of reprisal. Trump may not acknowledge any limits to what he can do, but the law and Constitution are filled with them, and the law doesn’t enforce itself.

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlZnAuY29tL2FjdGlvbi9kaXNhYmxlX2VtYWlsL2Rpc2FibGU_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveU5UTTRNVFF5TENKd2IzTjBYMmxrSWpveE9EUXpOVGsxTURFc0luTmxZM1JwYjI1ZmFXUWlPakUyTnpJM09Dd2lhV0YwSWpveE56WTRNalV5TXpNekxDSmxlSEFpT2pFM09UazNPRGd6TXpNc0ltbHpjeUk2SW5CMVlpMHlOakF6TkRjaUxDSnpkV0lpT2lKa2FYTmhZbXhsWDJWdFlXbHNJbjAuU3pYa01HZlBaV1BoZUNrQzhGZk5SSjVHUDFYRmljV05mYmE5d2hFNVg2OCZzZWN0aW9uX2lkPTE2NzI3OCIsInAiOjE4NDM1OTUwMSwicyI6MjYwMzQ3LCJmIjpmYWxzZSwidSI6MjUzODE0MiwiaWF0IjoxNzY4MjUyMzMzLCJleHAiOjIwODM4MjgzMzMsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.kj9zoftDQPt52d8GHx9LzSD2mQ4Bc63LzWGAYqXvYj4?
